Chapter 3-2 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Housing, Ch. 1-8; health, Ch. 2-3; fire prevention code, Ch. 3-3; impact fees, Ch. 3-31.5; mobile homes, Ch. 3-4; planning and development, Ch. 3-5; water and sewers, Ch. 3-8; zoning, Ch. 3-9; fire districts, Ch. 4-3; sewer and water districts, Ch. 4-5; contracting license, § 1-10-33; cable television license, § 1-10-161 et seq.; county buildings for amusement and entertainment, § 1-11-6; fallout shelters, § 2-1-45; building plans for food establishments, § 2-3-26; fire inspections of buildings under construction, § 3-3-9; approval of building in bed of street or road, § 3-5-25; plats, § 3-5-66 et seq.; building permits under zoning ordinance, § 3-9-5; moving of structures under zoning ordinance, § 3-9-5.7; signs, § 3-9-85. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to adopt technical codes, F.S. §§ 125.01(1)(i), 125.56; building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553; inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-2-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  General. As used in this chapter, "the board" will mean the Charlotte County Construction Industry Licensing Board, and the following words and terms shall have meanings as found in F.S. § 489.105: certificate, certified contractors, contractor, contracting, air conditioning contractors (class A), air conditioning contractors (class B), air conditioning contractors (class C), building contractors, general contractors, mechanical contractors, plumbing contractors, residential contractors, roofing contractors, sheet metal contractors, commercial swimming pool/spa contractors, residential swimming pool/spa contractors, maintenance swimming pool/spa contractors, underground utility and excavation contractors, specialty contractors, primary qualifying agent, secondary qualifying agent, registered contractors, and registration. The term electrical contractor shall have the meaning as found in F.S. § 489.505. 
(1)  Contractor means the person who is qualified for, and is only responsible for, the project contracted for and means, except as exempted in this chapter, the person who, for compensation, undertakes to, submits a bid to, or does himself or herself or by others construct, repair, alter, remodel, add to, demolish, subtract from, or improve any building or structure, including related improvements to real estate, for others or for resale to others or performs any work as defined in section 3-2-1(c)(1)—(19), Charlotte County Code. 
(2)  Contracting means, except as exempted in this chapter, engaging in business as a contractor and includes, but is not limited to, performance of any of the acts as set forth in Charlotte County Code section 3-2-1 which define types of contractors. The attempted sale of contracting services and the negotiation or bid for a contract on these services also constitutes contracting. If the services offered require licensure or agent qualification, the offering, negotiation for a bid, or attempted sale of these services requires the corresponding licensure. 
(3)  The exemption from licensure in F.S. § 489.103(1), regarding contractors in work on bridges, roads, streets, highways, or railroads, and services incidental thereto, hereby is deemed to apply to section 3-2-1, Charlotte County Code. 
(b)  Journeyman licenses. 
(1)  Journeyman electrician means any person qualified to perform work in the electrical trade while employed and supervised by a master electrician and who is licensed under the provisions of this chapter. A journeyman electrician cannot contract or perform work independently. 
(2)  Journeyman plumber means any person qualified to perform work in the plumbing trade while employed and supervised by a master plumber and who is licensed under the provisions of this chapter. A journeyman plumber cannot contract or perform work independently. 
All electricians, whether master or journeyman will be issued cards indicating the type of license held and will be required to exhibit them upon the request of the building official, building inspectors or code compliance officers. 
(c)  Local specialty contractors: Local specialty contractors are engaged in, but not necessarily limited to, one (1) or more of the following trades: 
(1)  Aluminum contractors are those who are qualified to work with aluminum and vinyl products and whose services are limited to the erection, repair, and alteration of aluminum carports, screened areas, sliding glass doors, retractable screens, storm shutters, porches on existing foundations, roofovers of mobile homes, soffit and fascia, and gutters and downspouts; the installation of vinyl and aluminum siding on residential and commercial projects; and the replacement of glass or vinyl windows in existing openings of porch enclosures on existing slabs but not in the primary structure or other habitable spaces. An aluminum contractor may perform limited carpentry necessary and incidental to such work but may not perform any work which affects the structural integrity of the building or structure. Aluminum contractors may not perform concrete or masonry work. 
(2)  Building demolition contractors, explosive. State license only. Permits for this type of demolition will be issued at the discretion of the building official on an "as needed" basis, with the approval of the authorized zoning, public safety, and fire prevention officials, and upon notification to the sheriff's office. 
(3)  Building demolition contractors, non-explosive are those who are qualified and have the knowledge and skill to demolish buildings and structures or interior demolitions of existing structures. A building demolition contractor, non-explosive, is limited to demolishing buildings two (2) habitable stories in height or less. A contractor must obtain a building demolition contractor, non-explosive license unless the contractor is a state certified contractor, registered contractor or local specialty contractor licensed to build the type of structure or improvement being demolished, or is otherwise exempted by this chapter. 
(4)  Building movers are those who are qualified to move buildings or structures from one site to another in accordance with all applicable building, zoning and traffic laws. Permits for building moving will be issued at the discretion of the building official on an "as needed" basis. 
(5)  Cabinet and trim carpentry contractors are those who have the knowledge and skills to install or maintain non-structural finished wood products including paneling, flooring, trim, cabinetry, countertops, non-structural dome ceilings, interior doors and all hardware incidental thereto, soffit and fascia, weatherproofing and install gutters and downspouts. Such contractor may not perform any work which affects the structural integrity of the building. Cabinet and trim carpentry contractors may install countertops made from materials other than wood or laminate, may perform minor "punch-out" type work on new construction such as minor drywall repair or painting touch up and may install manufactured partitions in restrooms. 
(6)  Carpentry contractors are those who are qualified to and have the knowledge and skill to construct wooden structures and install wood products, including, but not limited to, rough framing, including metal studs, structural and non-structural walls, trusses, sheathing, paneling, trim carpentry, roof dry-ins, soffit and fascia, gutters and downspouts, all types of siding materials applied to existing framework, dome ceilings, weatherproofing and installation of storm and security shutters, and doors and preglazed windows, but not garage doors. Carpentry contractors shall also be permitted to perform the work of a cabinet and trim carpenter. They may also perform the work of a drywall and painting contractor as provided herein when in conjunction with the work performed above. 
(7)  Concrete place and finish contractors are those who are qualified to batch and mix aggregates, cement, and water to agreed specifications, to construct forms and framework for the casting and shaping of concrete, including placement of mesh reinforcement bars, and steel reinforcement bars (rods) incidental thereto, to pour, place, and finish concrete and to perform mudjacking for flatwork only. This section would also apply to concrete sidewalks and driveways. Concrete place and finish contractors can install brick pavers and apply decorative materials to driveways, lanais and patios and can perform concrete cutting on existing slabs but cannot cut structural or vertical walls and cannot form or finish a structural concrete pool shell. 
(8)  Concrete/masonry contractors are those who are qualified to select, cut and lay brick and concrete block or any other unit masonry products, lay brick and other clay products, rough cut and dress stone, artificial stone and precast blocks, glass brick or block, or any person who is qualified to batch and mix aggregates, cement and water to agreed specifications, to construct forms and framework for the casting and shaping of concrete, to place and erect reinforcing steel and miscellaneous embedded steel, to place mesh reinforcement, plastic vapor barriers and edge forms, to pour, place and finish concrete including flatwork and to perform mudjacking. Concrete/masonry contractors can apply decorative materials to driveways, lanais and patios. This category shall also include those who are qualified to install tie beams and alternative wall systems, erect pre-cast or pre-stressed concrete products, and those who are qualified to install poured concrete roof deck systems. Concrete/masonry contractors shall also be permitted to perform the work of a plaster stucco and spraycrete contractor as provided herein but cannot form or finish a structural concrete pool shell. 
(9)  Door, window and garage door contractors are those who are qualified and have the knowledge and skill to install, repair or replace any door, window and garage door, including storm and security shutters, including any work necessary and incidental to such installation, repair or replacement. May perform the installation of vinyl and aluminum siding on residential and commercial projects. Such contractor may not perform any work which affects the structural integrity of the building. 
(10)  Drywall contractors are those who are qualified to install gypsum drywall products to wood and metal studs, to wood and steel joists and to metal runners in buildings of unlimited area and height. The scope of work shall include the preparation of the surface over which the drywall product is to be applied, including the placing of non-structural metal studs, runners and all necessary trim, and to spray coat drywall with a plaster aggregate mixture. 
(11)  Glass and glazing contractors are those who are qualified to install all types of windows, select, cut, assemble and install all makes and kinds of glass and glass work, and execute the glazing frames, panels, sash and door and holding metal frames, ornamental decorations, mirrors, and glass tub and shower enclosures. 
(12)  Grade, fill, and clearing contractors are those who are qualified to grade and fill lots, remove materials such as rock, gravel, sand, surface debris, and vegetation, including the grubbing of roots, removal of trees, clearing the land and leveling the surface incidental and necessary thereto, install driveway culverts and stormwater collection systems incidental thereto, including non-marine rip rap, in compliance with local building and zoning regulations and environmental laws. This is not to be construed as a license to perform underground utility work as defined herein nor to demolish buildings or structures, unless a permit has been obtained by a contractor licensed to perform these services and said contractor has listed the grade, fill and clear contractor as the subcontractor of record. 
(13)  Lawn irrigation contractors are those who are qualified to install, maintain, repair, alter, or extend all piping and sprinkler heads for the irrigation of laws. Such contractor may connect lawn irrigation piping to the pump, and the electrical controller to a service disconnect provided for that purpose, but may not otherwise connect to, alter, or repair any source of water intended for potable use, or connect to, alter or repair any electrical pump or any electrical pump wiring system or power supply in conjunction with the irrigation system. 
(14)  Marine construction contractors are those who are qualified with the experience and skill to construct, maintain, alter or repair seawalls, retaining walls, bulkheads, revetments, docks, pilings including installing pile wraps, decks, and boardwalks, boat lifts, piers, wharves, groins and other marine structures, including pile driving. Marine construction contractors may also perform dredging operations, install and maintain rip rap, and perform concrete work incidental to davit installation. Marine construction contractors shall also be permitted to perform the work of a pile driving contractor as provided herein. 
(15)  Pile driving contractors are those who are qualified with the experience and skill to drive piling, including sheet piling, and construction foundations, including the excavating, forming and placing of reinforcing steel and concrete, and performing other work incidental thereto; including pile wraps. 
(16)  Plaster, stucco, and spraycrete contractors are those who are qualified to coat surfaces with a mixture of sand or other aggregate, including river rock, gypsum plaster, Portland cement, or quick-lime and water, or any combination of such material as to create a permanent surface coating. May also apply paint, acrylic, epoxy, or other materials for coating of driveways, lanais, and patios. This shall include the installation of pre-manufactured or decorative stone. Such contractor may apply and affix gypsum or metal lath or any other product prepared or manufactured, including the placing of metal studs and runners to which lath is to be applied, to provide key or suction bases for the support of plaster coatings. Such contractors cannot form or finish a structural concrete pool shell. 
(17)  Sign contractors are those who are qualified to install, repair, add to or change non-electrical signs in accordance with building and zoning codes. 
(18)  Sign contractors, electrical are those who are qualified to install, repair, alter, add to, or change any electrical wires, apparatus, raceways, conduit, or any part thereof on electrical signs and are qualified to erect signs. Such contractor may connect to an existing sign circuit and may contract for and take out building permits for the erection of signs in accordance with building and zoning codes. 
(19)  Structural steel contractors are those who are qualified to erect structural steel shapes and plates, including such minor field fabrication as may be necessary, of any profile, perimeter or cross-section that are or may be used as structural members for buildings and structures, including riveting, bolting, welding and rigging, only in connection therewith. Structural steel contractors may install handrails. 
(d)  Certificates of competency for the following specialty contractors will remain valid so long as the contractor renews the certificate of competency in accordance with section 3-2-22. However, no new certificates of competency will be issued. 
(1)  Reinforcing steel contractors are those who are qualified to fabricate, place and tie steel reinforcing bars (rods) of any profile, perimeter, or cross-section, that are or may be used to reinforce concrete buildings and structures in such a manner that under all agreed specifications, steel reinforcing bars (rods) for concrete buildings and structures can be fabricated, placed and tied. In addition, these contractors will also be allowed to install swimming pool reinforcing steel bars (rods). 
(2)  Rip rap contractors are those who are qualified to use stone, compressed shell, and similar material to prevent the erosion of the soil, and to form or construct an erosion prevention wall or embankment. 
(3)  Shed tie-down contractors are those who are qualified to place and tie down all types of portable utility sheds in accordance with local building and zoning regulations. 
(4)  Swimming pool shell contractors are those who are qualified to excavate form and install concrete pool shells according to methods approved by applicable state and county codes. 
(5)  Tennis court contractors are those who are qualified to construct, maintain or repair tennis courts, including the preparation of the surface, drainage, paving, surface topping, concrete, asphalt, posts and fencing; provided, however, that any required electrical installations shall only be performed by a licensed electrical contractor. 
(e)  Only state certified contractors are recognized for the following specialty contractors. 
(1)  Alarm system contractors. 
(2)  Alarm system contractor I. 
(3)  Alarm system contractor II. 
(4)  Elevator installation contractors. 
(5)  Fire extinguish dry. 
(6)  Fire sprinkler system. 
(7)  Fire suppression system. 
(8)  Liquid petroleum gas. 
(9)  Mobile home dealers and manufacturers. 
(10)  Mobile home set up contractor. 
(11)  Specialty structure contractor. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 5, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 83-07, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 84-13, § 1, 7-14-84; Ord. No. 84-24, § 1, 11-6-84; Ord. No. 88-45, § 1, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 1, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 92-86, §§ 1—3, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 97-117, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 2000-001, § 1, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2002-042, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2006-057, § 1, 6-13-06; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 1, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 1, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2015-029, § 1, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2019-001, § 1, 1-8-19; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21; Ord. No. 2022-054, § 1, 11-8-22) 
State Law reference— Contracting, F.S. Ch. 489; definitions, F.S. §§ 489.105, 489.505; qualifications for practice, F.S. § 489.113. 
Sec. 3-2-2. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any orders or resolutions promulgated pursuant hereto shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 22, 3-8-83) 
Sec. 3-2-3. - Judicial enforcement generally. 
The Charlotte County Construction Industry Licensing Board, the board of county commissioners or any aggrieved person may, in addition to other remedies provided in this Code, apply to the courts for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and of the code or codes promulgated and adopted pursuant hereto. Such violations may be restrained by injunction, including mandatory injunction, or otherwise abated in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 23, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-4. - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people of the county and shall be effective in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 2, 3-8-83) 
Sec. 3-2-5. - Responsibility of contractors. 
(a)  Every contractor shall have all of the following responsibilities with respect to any work performed within the county by the contractor or under the contractor's direction, or by the contractor's employees or subcontractors, or for which the contractor or any partnership in which the contractor is a partner or any corporation in which the contractor is an employee or officer, shall receive or be promised any compensation or consideration either in money or other thing(s) of value: 
(1)  To see that all such work shall fully conform to the requirements of the applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the county pertaining or relating to such work, including but without being limited to, the Florida Building Code, in the editions now or hereafter adopted by the Florida Building Commission. 
(2)  To see that all such work is done in conformity with the plans and specifications covering same. 
(3)  To see that all progress or other payments made by or for the owner on account of any such work are properly applied in payment of labor and material bills in accordance with the Florida Construction Lien Law, F.S. Chapter 713. 
(b)  The responsibilities imposed upon contractors by this section shall be deemed to require the personal attendance and presence on the job of the contractor or his designated agent from time to time, and for such length of time as to assure the fulfillment of such responsibilities; and every contractor shall be deemed to be responsible for all work done under or by virtue of the authority of the certificate, even though performed by an employee or other third party, to the same extent as if such contractor had done the work personally. 
(c)  It shall be the responsiblity of the contractor to keep all payroll records including but not limited to wages paid, withholding tax, and Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) records pertaining to workers employed by the contractor for each job and to make the same available to the building official, building inspector or code compliance officer at any reasonable time, and from time to time during the progress of the work and for one (1) year after completion thereof. 
(d)  The fact that the building permit or other permit for a particular job or part of a job is issued to the owner or other third party shall not be deemed to diminish the responsibility of any contractor as set out in this section where the work is being done by the contractor or the contractor's employees or under the supervision of the certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 2000-001, § 2, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-6. - Certificates of competency—Generally. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor as defined in this chapter, or advertise himself as available to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a contractor, without first obtaining a certificate of competency as provided for herein or being duly certified by the state. 
(b)  Issuance to individual. When an individual proposes to do business in his own name, certification, when granted, shall be issued only to that individual. 
(c)  Issuance to corporation, partnership, etc. If the applicant proposes to engage in contracting as a partnership, corporation, business trust or other legal entity, the application shall state the name of the partnership and of its partners, or the name of the corporation and of its officers and directors, or the name of the business trust and the trustees, or the name of such other legal entity and its members, and furnish evidence of statutory compliance if a fictitious name is used, and furnish a copy of the charter, agreement or indenture or other instrument under which such business is organized. Such application shall also show that the person applying for the certificate of competency is legally qualified to act for the business organization in all matters connected with its contracting business and that he has authority to supervise construction undertaken by such business organization and that he has an active participation in the operation, management and control of the business organization. The certificate, when issued upon application of a business organization, shall be in the name of such business organization; and the name of the qualifying individual shall be noted thereupon. 
(1)  Affiliation of qualified individual with business organization. 
a.  At least one (1) supervising member or supervising employee of the business organization shall be qualified under this chapter in order for the business organization to be qualified by current certificate of competency in the category of the business conducted for which the supervising member or supervising employee is qualified. If an individual qualifying a business organization ceases to be affiliated with such business organization, he shall inform the county licensing division in writing. In addition, if such individual is the only qualified individual affiliated with the business organization, the business organization shall notify the board of the individual's termination and shall have a minimum of sixty (60) days from the termination of the individual's affiliation with the business organization in which to obtain another qualified person. It shall be unlawful for the business organization to contract, continue working or receive permits until a qualifying individual is obtained. 
b.  The individual shall also inform the building director in writing when he proposes to engage in contracting in his own name or in affiliation with another business organization, and he or such new business organization shall supply the same information to the board as required for applicants under this article. 
c.  After an investigation of the financial responsibility, credit and business reputation of the individual and the new business organization, upon a favorable determination, the building director shall forthwith issue, without an examination, a new certificate or registration in the individual's name; and the name of the business organization shall be noted thereon as provided above. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for a qualified individual to represent more than two (2) business entities. If an applicant desires to qualify more than one (1) business entity, he shall appear before the board and present evidence of having an active participation in the operation, management and control of the second company, as well as ability and financial responsibility as required by this section. The applicant shall also fully disclose all persons with a financial interest or expectancy in the second company. The issuance of such additional business qualification by the board shall be based on the following criteria. The decision of the board may be appealed by the applicant through the provisions provided herein. 
1.  The entity already qualified and the entity seeking to be qualified must both have a cash balance and positive net worth as evidenced by certified bank statements or other evidence from a Certified Public Accountant which are no more than thirty (30) days old. 
2.  Additional entities must have a minimum cash balance of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and a minimum net worth of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Documentation of verification of bank balance is required through certified bank statements. 
3.  The qualifier must be responsible for and capable of supervising, directing, managing and controlling both the contracting activities of the entity he qualifies and the entity he seeks to qualify. Managing of contracting activities includes the proper collection and disbursement of funds and the proper payment of subcontractors and other bills. In addition, he must be responsible for and capable of the supervision, direction, management and control of all entities for which he pulls permits. Geographical location of all entities involved must be so situated as to permit the aforementioned supervision, direction, management and control. The board will consider the ownership interest, status as a corporate officer, check-writing authority, and other facts as evidence of control of the entities. 
4.  Credit reports on all entities involved must be favorable and must include any liens and judgments against the entities, and those liens and judgments must not be such as to jeopardize the financial responsibility of the entities being qualified. 
5.  A qualifier must be doing business under the license he presently holds for at least one (1) year prior to his application to qualify an additional entity. 
(2)  Application process. 
a.  Submit a letter requesting an appearance before the board at the next regularly scheduled meeting to qualify for an additional license or to make a change to an existing additional license. The completed and correct application must be submitted to the board no later than three (3) weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board; however, it cannot be guaranteed that the application will be placed on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to plumbing contractors as defined in F.S. section 489.105. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 10, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 84-15, § 3, 7-17-89; Ord. No. 84-24, § 3, 11-6-84; Ord. No. 88-45, § 9, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 8, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 97-116, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 2, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 2, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2015-029, § 2, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-42. Former § 3-2-6 is now located in § 3-2-46. 
Secs. 3-2-7—3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY BUILDING BOARD AND BUILDING DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2. 

Sec. 3-2-21. - Created. 
There is created the Charlotte County Construction Industry Licensing Board which, pursuant to the provision of this article, shall recommend to the board of county commissioners policy with respect to the functioning, supervision and administration of the Charlotte County Building Construction Services Department, which department is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 1, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-22. - Certificate of competency procedures. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The county Construction Industry Licensing Board (CILB), or the building director, or his designee, shall examine and determine the qualifications of persons desiring to engage in the trade or occupation of contractor, as defined in this chapter, and shall issue to such persons as are determined to be qualified, local certificates of competency. 
(2)  In addition, the CILB may revoke or suspend local certificates of competency issued under this chapter, as provided herein. The CILB may also suspend the right to obtain building permits of contractors certified pursuant to state law. 
(b)  Waiving certificate requirements. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or the Code to the contrary, the CILB may waive any or all of the requirements for a certificate of competency and after approving such waiver, grant a certificate of competency with or without restrictions or limitations for any trade for which the CILB issues or approves certificates of competency upon written application by an individual and payment of an administrative fee established by the approved scale of fees. The applicant shall be sponsored by an active certified or registered contractor who must appear before the CILB with the applicant. It is the expressed policy of the CILB that this waiver be used sparingly and only in the most exceptional circumstances. It is not intended that waivers are to be routinely granted. It is expected that all individuals seeking a local certificate of competency in their particular trade will follow the procedures set forth in the Code to obtain such certification. In determining whether to waive the requirements for a certificate of competency, the CILB shall consider, without limitation, the following factors: 
(1)  The score obtained on any recognized examination for a particular trade. 
(2)  Whether the individual is has a certificate of competency or the equivalent from another Florida county or in another jurisdiction not within Florida. 
(3)  The number of years the individual has been engaged in a particular trade. 
(4)  The type of local certificate of competency the individual is seeking. 
(5)  The likelihood of danger to the public health, safety and welfare if the individual is granted a local certificate of competency. 
(6)  Any other pertinent factor that relates to a particular individual's qualifications or lack thereof to obtain a local certificate of competency by waiver. 
(c)  Applications; qualifications. Individuals desiring local certificates of competency shall make an application on a form provided by the CILB. No person shall be entitled to be examined until he has furnished proof satisfactory to the board that he has met the following requirements: 
(1)  a.  Has attained the age of eighteen (18) years or more. 
b.  Is authorized to work in the United States, pursuant to Title 8, United States Code § 1621. 
(2)  a.  Has financial responsibility as determined by the CILB or the building director, or his designee, based on a credit report no more than six (6) months old, obtained at the cost of the applicant from a nationally recognized agency, issued in the applicant's name and mailed directly to the building department; or any other documentation as may reasonably be required by the above-mentioned authority. 
b.  "Financial responsibility" is defined as the ability to safeguard that the public will not sustain economic loss resulting from the contractor's inability to pay his lawful obligations under the contract. 
c.  The financial responsibility grounds on which the board may refuse to qualify an applicant shall include, but not be limited to, the existence, within the past five (5) years preceding the application, of an unsatisfied court judgment rendered against the applicant based upon the failure of the applicant to pay his just obligations. 
(3)  Is of good moral character. 
(4)  Meets eligibility requirements according to one (1) of the following criteria: 
a.  Has received a baccalaureate degree from an accredited four-year college in the appropriate field of engineering, architecture or building construction and has one (1) year of proven experience in the category in which the person seeks to qualify. Two thousand (2,000) man hours in the category applied for in any twelve-month period shall constitute a year of experience for the purpose of this section. 
b.  Has four (4) years of active experience as follows: Has at least three (3) years of active experience as a workman who has learned his trade by serving an apprenticeship or as a skilled workman who is able to command the rate of a mechanic in his particular trade and has at least one (1) year of active experience at the level of foreman who is in charge of a group of workmen and usually is responsible to a superintendent or a contractor or his equivalent, if applying for a certificate for an activity described in the definitions of "general contractors" through "underground utility contractors" in Section 3-2-1. 
c.  Has a combination of not less than one (1) year of experience as a foreman and not less than thirty-six (36) credits from any accredited college in a related field of study; has a combination of not less than one (1) year of experience as a skilled workman, one (1) year of experience as a foreman, and not less than two (2) years of credit from any accredited college-level courses; or has a combination of not less than two (2) years of experience as a skilled workman, one (1) year of experience as a foreman, and not less than one (1) year of credits from any accredited college-level courses. For the number of years of credits from any accredited college-level courses, the applicant shall show completion of an equal number of courses in the appropriate field of engineering, architecture or building construction. All junior or community college level courses shall be considered accredited college-level courses. 
d.  Except as provided below for home inspectors, individuals desiring a local specialty contractor's certificate of competency has three (3) years of active experience in the specialty trade. 
e.  Applicants for certificate of competency for local specialty contractors as defined in Section 3-2-1(c)(1) through (27), may elect to substitute two (2) years of required experience with a completed certification in a relevant course of study from the Charlotte Technical Center or other similar vocational or technical center located in Florida. A detailed course description plus the students' transcript, must be included as part of the application. 
(5)  Additional eligibility requirements for building and general contractors. 
a.  An active county residential contractor is eligible to take the building contractor's examination if he possesses a minimum of three (3) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
b.  An active county residential contractor is eligible to take the general contractors' examination if he possesses a minimum of four (4) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
c.  An active county building contractor is eligible to take the general contractors' examination if he possesses a minimum of four (4) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
(6)  Additional eligibility requirements for air conditioning contractors. 
a.  An active county air conditioning class C contractor is eligible to take the air conditioning class B contractors' examination if he possesses a minimum of three (3) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
b.  An active county air conditioning class C contractor is eligible to take the air conditioning class A contractors' examination if he possesses a minimum of four (4) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
c.  An active county air conditioning class B contractor is eligible to take the air conditioning class A contractors' examination if he possesses a minimum of one (1) year of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
(7)  Additional eligibility requirements for plumbing contractors. 
a.  No person shall be eligible to take the examination for a master plumber's certificate until such time as he has completed six (6) years of experience in the plumbing trade. However, an active county licensed journeyman plumber shall be eligible to take the examination for a master plumber certificate upon the completion of two (2) years as a journeyman plumber. 
(8)  Additional eligibility requirements for electrical contractors. 
a.  No person shall be entitled to a journeyman's license until he has one (1) of the following requirements: 
1.  Produced proof satisfactory to the building board that he has four (4) years of experience in the electrical trade and a grade of seventy-five (75) percent or better on the journeyman electrical exam; or 
2.  Successfully completed an electrical apprenticeship program acceptable to the CILB, including such examinations as may be required by that board, and approved for same by the CILB. 
b.  No person shall be eligible to take the examination for a master electrician's certificate until such time as he has completed six (6) years of experience in the electrical trade. However, an active county licensed journeyman electrician shall be eligible to take the examination for master electrician upon completion of two (2) years as a journeyman electrician. 
(9)  Additional eligibility requirements for swimming pool/spa contractors. 
a.  An active registered swimming pool/spa servicing contractor is eligible to take the residential swimming/spa pool contractor's examination if he possesses a minimum of three (3) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
b.  An active registered swimming pool/spa servicing contractor is eligible to take the commercial swimming/spa pool contractor's examination if he possesses a minimum of four (4) years of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
c.  An active registered residential swimming pool/spa servicing contractor is eligible to take the commercial swimming/spa pool contractor's examination if he possesses a minimum of one (1) year of proven experience in the classification in which he has a certificate of competency. 
(10)  Additional eligibility requirements for underground utility contractors. 
a.  No person shall be entitled to an underground utility contractor's certificate of competency until he has met one (1) of the following requirements: 
b.  Produced proof satisfactory to the board that he has four (4) years of experience in the trade and a grade of seventy-five (75) percent or better on the underground utility contractor's exam. 
(d)  Conduct of examinations. All examinations shall be industry accepted standardized test prepared by testing companies approved by the CILB upon the recommendation of the county licensing division. Examinations may be proctored and graded by the testing company or if authorized by the creator of the test by the county licensing division. The examination shall be for the purpose of testing the qualifications of applicants and their familiarity with rules, regulations and the technical codes involved. Persons failing to pass any examination may apply for a reexamination. A grade on such examination of at least seventy-five (75) percent shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of any certificate of competency. 
(1)  If a contractor is state certified and applies to obtain a local certificate of competency, the business and law portion of the state exam will be reciprocated as long as the applicant has passed the exam, regardless of the score achieved. A score of at least seventy-five (75) percent must be obtained on the trade exam for which the applicant has applied. 
(e)  Fees, certificate renewal, termination. 
(1)  A schedule of reasonable fees for applications and examinations for the issuance of a certificate of competency shall be adopted by the board of county commissioners upon the recommendation of the CILB. All such fees shall be deposited in the county general fund and used specifically for the enforcement of contractor licensing regulations in Charlotte County. 
(2)  Each applicant who passes the examination shall be furnished a certificate of competency by the building board. 
(3)  Certificates of competency issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on September 30 of a given period as determined by the department director. Each holder of a certificate of competency shall have the same renewed on or before September 30, and it will be the responsibility of the certificate holder to ensure this is done. Each holder shall pay a fee in accordance with the scale of fees recommended by the CILB and approved by the board of county commissioners. Fees shall be deposited in the county general fund and used specifically for the enforcement of contractor licensing regulations in Charlotte County. 
(4)  New certificates of competency shall have the following prorated fees: 
a.  Issuance during the first twelve (12) months shall pay the full biannual fee. 
b.  Issuance during the last twelve (12) months shall pay fifty (50) percent of the biannual fee. 
(5)  Certificate of competency renewal after expiration date shall carry the following penalties in addition to renewal fees: 
a.  A penalty of ten (10) percent shall be added to the renewal fee during the first thirty (30) days after expiration of the certificate. 
b.  A penalty of twenty-five (25) percent shall be added to the renewal fee during the second thirty-day period after expiration of the certificate. 
c.  A penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be added to the renewal fee during the third thirty-day period after expiration of the certificate. 
d.  A penalty of one hundred (100) percent shall be added to the renewal fee after ninety (90) days following the expiration of the certificate. If the certificateholder also has not maintained the license in another Florida jurisdiction within the previous five (5) years, the certificateholder will be required to retake the appropriate trade and business and law examinations. 
(6)  Certificates of competency previously issued without examination in such areas that currently require an examination shall terminate if not renewed by September 30 of each period. The holder thereof shall then be required to pass the appropriate examination before a new certificate of competency will be reissued. 
(7)  The holder of an active certificate may, upon written request in a form prescribed by the building director, transfer his certificate to an inactive status for a fee established by the approved scale of fees per year for a period of no more than five (5) consecutive years, at which time the license shall terminate unless reactivated under the requirements of this chapter or an extension is granted by the building board. A reactivation fee established by the approved scale of fees will be assessed in addition to the above fee requirements. 
(8)  A licensee who holds a "grandfathered" certificate of competency in any trade or craft must maintain said license in compliance with the provisions of this chapter as pertains to renewal or inactivation. Failure to do so shall result in loss of the "grandfathered" status and will require passing an appropriate examination for certificate renewal in such trades or crafts that currently require examinations. 
(9)  Failure of the certificate holder to maintain a current file on a certificate of competency that has been placed inactive will result in the holder paying upon renewal a retroactive fee established by the approved scale of fees per year to the last date valid certificate was held, said period not to exceed five (5) years. 
Nothing in this provision shall apply to inactive "grandfathered" certificates of competency, which will be regulated as stated above. 
(10)  If a certificate is not renewed or maintained on an inactive status for five (5) years, the certificate holder's file will be purged from the licensing division records and it will be the responsibility of the certificate holder to supply all necessary documents to renew his license. If the certificateholder has not maintained the license in another Florida jurisdiction, the certificateholder will be required to retake the appropriate trade and business and law examinations. 
(11)  The holder of any certificate, employed in a governmental agency, state, local or federal, which regulates the building industry, and the rules of which agency prevent the employee from operating in the capacity of contractor, may continue to keep his certificate in inactive status for more than five (5) years. There shall be no fee charged to such employee for keeping his certificate in inactive status in any year, provided that such employee applies to inactive status in each year he desires to keep his certificate in inactive status. 
(12)  No person shall be entitled to a renewal of any certificate of competency which has been revoked unless he fulfilled all requirements ordered by the CILB, and such requirements may include reexamination. 
(13)  An administrative fee established by the approved scale of fees will be assessed for any certificate of competency name change. 
(14)  An administrative fee for letters of reciprocity will be assessed as follows: First letter, free: each additional letter will be subject to a fee established by the approved scale of fees. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 15, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 84-15, § 1, 7-17-84; Ord. No. 84-24, § 1, 11-6-84; Ord. No. 88-45, § 10, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 9, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 10, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 92-86, § 4, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 95-036, § 1, 8-29-95; Ord. No. 2002-042, §§ 2, 3, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 3, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 3, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2015-029, § 3, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 6, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-46. Former § 3-2-22 is now located in § 3-2-42. 
Annotation—Where a building contractor applied for a certificate of competency, it could not be denied on the ground that he had sought relief under the bankruptcy laws, Lambillotte v. Charlotte County, 25 B.R. 392 (1982). 
Sec. 3-2-23. - Status of technical codes; 
The Florida Building Code, as amended, is the building code in effect in the county. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 6, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 83-11, § 1, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 2000-001, § 3, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2003-018, § 1, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-24. - Exceptions generally. 
The certificate of competency and examining provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
The exceptions listed in F.S. §§ 489.103 and 489.503. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 20, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 83-11, § 3, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 84-21, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 88-45, § 7, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 7, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 7, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 92-86, § 5, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 97-078, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2000-001, § 4, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 4, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 4, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21; Ord. No. 2022-054, § 1, 11-8-22) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-40, as renumbered from § 3-2-41. Former § 3-2-24 is now located in § 3-2-40. 
State Law reference— Exemptions from contracting laws, F.S. §§ 489.103, 489.503. 
Secs. 3-2-25, 3-2-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-010, § 6, adopted Mar. 26, 2002, repealed § 3-2-26, which pertained to examination exceptions and specialty category contractors, derived from Ord. No. 88-45, § 8, adopted Dec. 20, 1988; Ord. No. 92-16, § 8, adopted Feb. 26, 1992; and Ord. No. 92-86, § 6, adopted Oct. 20, 1992. 
Sec. 3-2-27. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, move, demolish, erect, alter or repair any building or structure or any roof structure, or any electrical or plumbing or mechanical facility, without first obtaining a permit from the building director or his authorized deputy, as required by the department. However, no permit shall be required for any sign exempt under subsection 3-9-95 1.1.10 of the county zoning regulations in this Code, as that section may be amended from time to time, and no permit shall be required for the structures described in subsection 3-2-23(c). A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances or the Laws of Florida. The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the building director from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction or of violations of this chapter, or of any code adopted hereunder, or of any applicable portions of the county zoning regulations. 
(b)  Applications for a permit may be made by an owner or contractor in a form prescribed by the building director in conformance with this chapter and all applicable codes including all applicable portions of the county zoning regulations. Each such application shall be accompanied by a statement signed by the owner in a form prescribed by the building director stating that he has investigated and determined that the contractor holds a valid county certificate of competency to perform the work proposed and that he has investigated and determined that potable water is or is not available at the building site. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 9, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 83-11, § 2, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 83-23, § 1, 7-26-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 6, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 6, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 6, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 5, 11-13-12) 
Secs. 3-2-28—3-2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTORS, JOURNEYMEN, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Contracting, F.S. Ch. 489. 

Sec. 3-2-40. - Fees. 
The Board of County Commissioners, upon recommendation of the board, shall establish a schedule of reasonable fees for permits and inspections of installations undertaken by the crafts and trades governed by this chapter, said fees to remain in effect until amended under this chapter; and all such fees collected shall be deposited in the Building Special Revenue Fund. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 7, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 4, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 92-16, § 4, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 5, 5-13-14) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-24. Former § 3-2-40 is now located in § 3-2-24. 
Sec. 3-2-41. - Emergency meetings of the construction industry licensing board. 
If the building or licensing official finds that the actions of a contractor, whether a county certificate holder or state certified, constitute an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the building or licensing official shall pursue the following procedure in order to realize a temporary suspension of the contractor's authority to obtain building permits: 
(a)  (1)  The building or licensing official shall call an emergency meeting of the board for the purposes of hearing the charges made against the contractor by the building or licensing official. At the emergency meeting, all parties shall have an opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved, to conduct cross-examination, and to submit rebuttal evidence. 
(2)  Not less than three (3) days before the emergency meeting of the board, the building or licensing official shall notify the contractor of the substance of the charge against him and the facts expected to be relied upon by the building or licensing official to sustain the charges. Notices shall be considered served on the contractor if hand-delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the contractor as shown in the records of the community development department or in the case of a state certified contractor, the address on file with the department of business and professional regulation. 
(3)  Upon conclusion of the special meeting, if the board finds that there is competent and substantial evidence to support the building or licensing official's assertion that the contractor's actions constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, then the board may suspend the authority of the contractor to obtain building permits for a period of up to thirty (30) days. Such emergency suspension shall not be renewable. 
(4)  The board shall, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, initiate the formal proceedings against the contractor described in section 3-2-47. 
(b)  The building or licensing official may request the construction industry licensing board to call an emergency meeting during an officially declared state of emergency to address issues caused by the state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 3, 3-3-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 5, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 5, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 5, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 2003-018, § 2, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 6, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 6, 5-13-14) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-26. Former § 3-2-41 is now located in § 3-2-26. 
Sec. 3-2-42. - Construction industry license board—Membership; organization; board attorney; powers; appeals. 
(a)  Membership. The Charlotte County Construction Industry Licensing Board (CILB) shall have nine (9) members appointed by the board of county commissioners to serve at the pleasure of the board of county commissioners. The membership shall consist of one (1) member shall be a general contractor, one (1) a plumbing contractor, one (1) an electrical contractor, one (1) an air conditioning or mechanical contractor, one (1) a specialty contractor, and one (1) an architect or engineer registered in the state. The board shall have three (3) members of the general public with no financial interest, direct or indirect, in the building trades. 
(1)  Members of the board shall be residents of or maintain a principal place of business in the county for two (2) years; and 
(2)  Contractors must have current and active certificate of competency issued either by the state or the county. 
(b)  Term of office, forfeiture of appointment and filling of vacancies. 
(1)  All appointments to the board shall be made for a term of four (4) years. A board member may serve two (2) consecutive terms or up to a total of eleven (11) years. After two (2) consecutive terms or a total of eleven (11) years, a board member must roll-off for a period of at least one (1) year. 
(2)  Board members shall forfeit their appointment for conviction of any felony or misdemeanor relating to moral turpitude. They may also forfeit their appointment for conviction of construction industry regulation violations or conduct unbecoming a board member, at the discretion of the board members or the board of county commissioners. They shall also forfeit their appointment for chronic absenteeism (more than two (2) consecutive meetings, or more than four (4) meetings in a twelve-month period). 
(3)  Any vacancy on the board shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(c)  Organization, board attorney, administration and compensation. 
(1)  The board shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman who shall serve in that capacity for one (1) year. This election shall be held at the last scheduled board meeting of the year. The newly elected chairman and vice chairman shall assume the duties at the first scheduled board meeting of the new year. 
(2)  The county shall provide, through outside counsel, an attorney to act as legal counsel to the board. 
(3)  The county shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may reasonably be required by the board for the proper performance of its duties. 
(4)  Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the county commissioners. 
(d)  Meetings, records and quorum. 
(1)  The board shall regularly convene at least once every two (2) months, but may convene more often as the agenda demands. All regular and special meetings, hearings and records of all the board's transactions and deliberations shall be open to the public. 
(2)  Five (5) members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting, and a majority vote of those present shall be required to make any decision. 
(e)  Disqualification of a board member. A member may be disqualified to act in a particular proceeding, either voluntarily or by a majority vote of the board, for reasons of bias, prejudice or significant personal interest in the matter involved. For purposes of this section, "bias and prejudice" are defined as a member's predisposition either for or against any individual involved in a proceeding, or any issue being considered by the board. Significant personal interest by a member means that the proceedings before the board create a situation where a private duty or interest, as defined in F.S. Chapter 112, Code of Ethics of Public Employees. 
(f)  Jurisdiction of board. The board has jurisdiction over all matters contained within this chapter. 
(g)  Powers of the board. 
(1)  To develop and adopt minimum standards for certificates of competency of local and registered contractors that are to be kept and made available through the county community development department. 
(2)  To determine the qualifications of applicants for the various types of local and registered contractors' certificates of competency and approve or deny issuance thereof. 
(3)  To promulgate rules and procedures for the conduct of its meetings and hearings and take sworn testimony therein. 
(4)  To hold and conduct hearings in an effort to determine the validity of alleged violations brought by the county against local specialty, registered and certified contractors. 
(5)  To issue subpoenas only upon the specific request of a party to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents before the board, said subpoenas to be served by an individual who is qualified to serve subpoenas under either the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure or Florida Statutes, as they may be amended. 
Failure to comply with any subpoena issued under this section could result in an enforcement proceeding before the circuit court for the twentieth judicial circuit, which is empowered to hear such cases. 
(6)  To discipline a registered contractor or local specialty contractor found in violation of this chapter, state laws regulating the construction industry, zoning codes, or any requirements hereunder by: 
a.  Revoking, suspending or denying the issuance or renewal of his or her certificate of competency. 
b.  Revoking or suspending his permit pulling privileges, and the authority to perform work which requires a permit or issuing him permits with specific conditions. 
c.  Reprimanding, either in writing or verbally. 
d.  Requiring reexamination. 
e.  Placing on probation for a specific period of time. 
f.  Any combination of the above. 
g.  Referring the case findings and all related case materials on Certified or Registered Contractors to the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation for review. 
h.  Issuing fines in accordance with section 3-2-44 for registered or local specialty contractors. 
(7)  To discipline a certified contractor found in violation of this chapter, state laws regulating the construction industry, zoning codes, or any requirements hereunder by: 
a.  Revoking or suspending his authority to obtain permits thereby preventing him from performing work which requires a permit unless he is operating as an employee of a licensed contractor, or issuing permits with specific conditions. 
b.  Suspending or revoking his authority to engage in business or act in the capacity of a contractor in Charlotte County. 
c.  Referring the case findings and all related case materials to the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation for review. 
(8)  To impose fines, order restitution and assess reasonable investigative and legal costs associated with the prosecution of violations, pursuant to F.S. section 489.131(7)(b). Any fines, restitution and costs so imposed shall be in addition to any other discipline authorized in this section. 
(9)  The decision of the board in each case shall be represented by a final order, in the form approved by the CILB, signed by the chairman of the CILB. 
(10)  a.  To issue an order upon written notification by the code enforcement officer that a violator had not contested or paid the civil penalty of a citation issued pursuant to section 3-2-46 and F.S. Chapter 489, within the timeframe allowed on the citation, or if a violation has not been corrected within the timeframe set forth on the notice of violation, the enforcement or licensing board or the designated special magistrate shall enter an order directing the violator to pay the civil penalty set forth on the citation or notice of violation, and a hearing shall not be necessary for the issuance of such order. 
b.  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty against an uncertified contractor, unregistered contractor, or person without a local certificate of competency, or against an individual who hires or contracts with such unlicensed person, may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against any real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including a levy against personal property; however, such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this part shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this subsection, whichever occurs first. After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the enforcement board or licensing board or designated special magistrate may authorize the local governing body's attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this part may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under s. 4, Art. X of the State Constitution. 
(h)  Appeals. 
(1)  In accordance with F.S. § 162.11, an aggrieved party may appeal a final disciplinary order of the board to the 20th Judicial Circuit Court within thirty (30) days of the date the final order is signed by the chairman. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 4, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 3, 2-20-88; Ord. No. 89-58, § 3, 4, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 89-69, § 1,2, 9-19-89; Ord. No. 92-16, § 3, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 92-63, § 1, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 2000-001, §§ 6, 7, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 7, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 7, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2015-029, § 4, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 7, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 2020-046, § 1, 11-24-20; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21; Ord. No. 2023-033, § 1, 7-11-23) 
Note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-22. Former § 3-2-42 is now located in § 3-2-6. 
Sec. 3-2-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009, deleted § 3-2-43, which pertained to licensing, and derived from Ord. No. 83-04, § 11, adopted March 8, 1983. 
Sec. 3-2-44. - Restitution, fines and costs. 
(a)  The board, in addition to the powers enumerated in section 3-2-42 of this Code, is hereby granted authority, pursuant to F.S. section 489.131(7)(b), to impose fines, order restitution and assess reasonable investigative and legal costs associated with the prosecution of violations against the violator. 
(b)  In imposing fines, determining the amount of restitution to be ordered, and assessing costs the board may, in addition to other relevant factors, take into consideration the following: 
(1)  The monetary or other damage suffered by the violator's customer, which damage the violator has not already mitigated as of the time the penalty is assessed. 
(2)  Actual job site violations of building codes, or conditions exhibiting gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct by the violator which have not been corrected at the time the penalty is assessed. 
(3)  The severity of the violation. 
(4)  The danger to the public. 
(5)  The number of violations. 
(6)  The length of time the violator has engaged in contracting. 
(7)  The deterrent effect of the penalty. 
(8)  The effect of the penalty upon the violator's livelihood. 
(9)  The violator's efforts at rehabilitation. 
(10)  Other mitigating or aggravating circumstances. 
(c)  The following guidelines shall be used in disciplinary cases against locally licensed or registered contractors, absent aggravating or mitigating circumstances: 

 
(Ord. No. 2000-001, § 5, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 8, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 8, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Sec. 3-2-45. - Examinations. 
The Charlotte County Construction Industry Licensing Board shall be the board of examiners for all of the trades and crafts affected by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 14, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 83-11, § 4, 4-19-83; Ord. No. 2000-001, § 8, 1-11-00) 
Sec. 3-2-46. - Code compliance officer. 
(a)  Definition. A code compliance officer is any person authorized by the board of county commissioners to investigate and enforce the provisions of this chapter, any state laws pertaining to the regulation of the construction industry, zoning codes, and all amendments to these regulations. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Duties. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of any person designated as a code compliance officer to enforce the provisions of the county contractors' licensing code, and state laws as pertain to the licensing and regulation of the construction industry, and subsequent amendments thereto relating to these respective regulations. 
(2)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize or permit any person designated as a code compliance officer pursuant to this chapter to perform any function or duties of a law enforcement officer other than as specified herein. Said code compliance officers designated pursuant to this chapter shall not make any physical arrests or take any person into custody and shall be exempt from the requirements relating to the state high-hazard retirement program and police standards and training commission as defined as provided by general law. 
(d)  Methods of enforcement. 
(1)  Receiving complaints of alleged violations by telephone, in person, written, observation, or referred by sheriff's office or other agency. 
(2)  Recognizing elements that constitute violations. 
(3)  Enforcement. 
a.  Contact with complainant. 
b.  Contact with offender. 
c.  Instructions and advice. 
d.  Warnings. 
1.  Written. 
2.  Stop work. 
3.  Cease and desist. 
4.  Notice of violation (LICENSED CONTRACTORS ONLY). 
5.  Citation. 
e.  Administrative proceedings before the CILB. 
1.  Number of violation notices. 
2.  Time between violation notices. 
3.  Severity of violation. 
4.  Referral to D.B.P.R. 
f.  Prosecution. Prepare and refer cases that require state's attorney involvement to that agency. 
Criminal action may be taken against unlicensed contractors in lieu of or in addition to code enforcement board action. 
g.  Advise complainant of action taken, if appropriate. 
(e)  Issuance of citation. 
(1)  Code compliance officers shall have the authority to initiate enforcement proceedings against uncertified-unregistered contractors and property owners who hire or contract with uncertified-unregistered contractors or specialty contractors without local certificates of competency or who proceed on any job without first obtaining applicable local building permits and inspections. 
(2)  A violation relating to contractors without certificates of competency engaging in the business or acting in the capacity of a contractor or advertising himself or herself as available to engage in the capacity of a contractor without the appropriate certificate of competency or being duly registered or certified is deemed to be a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare and will not require the issuance of a notice of violation or warning prior to the issuance of a citation. 
(3)  A code compliance officer may issue a separate citation for each day that a violation is found to exist. The citation form shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Time and date of issuance. 
b.  Name of code compliance officer issuing the notice. 
c.  Name and address of violator. 
d.  Code section that has been violated. 
e.  Brief description of the nature of the violation, including location, date, and time of violation. 
f.  Amount of the applicable civil penalty. 
g.  Procedure for the person to follow to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
h.  Notice that additional citations may be issued for each day that the applicable violation is found to exist. 
i.  Notice that failure to request an administrative hearing before the CILB within ten (10) days after service of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays, shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing, and that such waiver shall constitute an admission of violation. 
j.  Notice that the violator may be liable for the reasonable costs of the administrative hearing should the violator be found guilty of the violation. 
(4)  A person who has been served with a citation shall elect either to: 
a.  Pay the civil penalty in the manner indicated on the citation; or 
b.  Request an administrative hearing before the CILB within ten (10) days of service of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays. 
(5)  Appeal of the citation by administrative hearing shall be accomplished by filing a request in writing to the address indicated on the notice or citation, not later than ten (10) days after service of the citation, exclusive of weekends and legal holidays. At the hearing, the person charged with the citation or his duly appointed representative may challenge the validity of the citation, and show that the violation has been corrected. 
(6)  Failure of a violator to appeal the decision of the code compliance officer within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to an administrative hearing. A waiver of the right to administrative hearing shall be deemed an admission of the violation, and penalties may be imposed accordingly. 
(f)  Administrative hearings. 
(1)  The CILB shall have jurisdiction to hear all matters regarding the issuance of a notice of violation or a citation issued by a code compliance officer for matters regarding the issuance of a notice of violation or a citation for contracting without the appropriate certificate of competency and registration or certification with the state of Florida. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely request for an administrative hearing, the matter shall be set for hearing on the next regularly scheduled hearing or as soon thereafter as possible. 
(3)  Upon receipt of said request for an administrative hearing, the county shall serve a notice of hearing to the violator, which notice shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Place, date and time of the hearing. 
b.  Right of violator to be represented by an attorney. 
c.  Right of violator to present witnesses and evidence and conduct cross-examination. 
d.  A conspicuous statement reflecting the requirements of F.S. Chapter 286 that a person deciding to appeal any decision of the CILB will need to ensure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made. 
In lieu of providing a notice of hearing as provided above, the county may include a hearing date in the citation that will be scheduled if the violator requests an administrative hearing, provided that the citation includes the information required by this subsection. 
(4)  No hearing shall be scheduled sooner than ten (10) days from the date of service of the citation unless there is reason to believe that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. All hearings shall be administratively scheduled by the building construction services department. 
(5)  All hearings shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath, minutes shall be taken, and the proceedings shall be recorded. 
(6)  Each case before the CILB shall be presented by the personnel designated by the county administrator. 
(7)  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental principles of due process shall be observed and govern the proceedings. All evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence shall be admissible in a court in the State of Florida. 
(8)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter. 
(9)  The CILB shall make findings of fact based on evidence presented. In order to make a finding affirming the code compliance officer's decision, the CILB must find by a preponderance of the evidence that the violator was responsible for the violation of the relevant code provision as cited. 
(10)  If the violator is found guilty of the violation and the appropriate penalty is assessed, the violator may also be held liable for the reasonable costs of the administrative hearing, at the discretion of the CILB. 
(11)  If the CILB finds that a violation exists, it may order the violator to pay a civil penalty of not less than the amount set forth on the citation but not more than that allowed by F.S. Chapter 489. In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the CILB shall consider the gravity of the violation, any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation, and any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(12)  The CILB shall have the power to: 
a.  Take testimony under oath. 
b.  Determine whether cited violations occurred. 
c.  Assess and order the payment of civil penalties and administrative costs as provided under this chapter. 
d.  Impose liens as provided herein. 
(g)  Collection and recovery of civil penalties. 
(1)  The county administrator shall provide by administrative order the appropriate guidelines and procedures for the administration, collection, record keeping, reporting, and accountability of penalties assessed under this article. Monies collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the county general fund and used specifically for the enforcement of contractor licensing regulations in Charlotte County. 
(h)  Appellate review for contested citations after the finding of a violation by the CILB. The violator or the county may appeal a decision of the CILB by certiorari to the Charlotte County Circuit Court within thirty (30) days of the date of rendition of the decision of the CILB. 
(i)  Provisions contained herein are supplemental. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the county from enforcing the provisions of the building code by any other means. 
(j)  Conflict and severance. In the event this section conflicts with any other county Code section or other applicable law, the more restrictive shall apply. If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-45, § 2, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 92-16, § 2, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 93-60, §§ 1—7, 12-14-93; Ord. No. 2000-001, §§ 9—11, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 9, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 9, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— This text was formerly found in § 3-2-6. Former § 3-2-46 is now located in § 3-2-22. 
Sec. 3-2-47. - Disciplinary action. 
(a)  The county, through its authorized agents, upon the verified written complaint of any person, or upon other evidence of a violation, shall investigate the action of any holder of a certificate of competency, whether certified, registered or local, and hold a hearing to determine the necessity for disciplinary action. The certificate holder shall be notified by certified mail and regular mail of the time and place of such hearing and shall be furnished a copy of the complaint or a short and plain statement of the matters asserted by the code compliance officer. All parties shall have the opportunity to be heard and present evidence and argument on the issues involved, to conduct cross examination and submit rebuttal evidence. In all disciplinary proceedings before the board, the burden of proof shall be on the county. Proof shall be by substantial competent evidence presented to the board by the code compliance officer or anyone having standing in the matter. 
(b)  The following acts are unlawful, constitute cause for disciplinary action, and are hereby deemed willful building code violations: 
(1)  Any violation of F.S. section 489.129 or section 489.533, whether by a certified, registered or local contractor. 
(2)  The making of a material false statement in the application for or renewal or updating of any certificate or registration, or for the issuance of any permit. 
(3)  Any act which results in a reprimand, censure, revocation, suspension or other discipline by any board of the Florida Department of Professional Regulation. 
(4)  Willful or deliberate disregard and violation of any lawful order of the board, any provisions of Charlotte County Code, chapter 3-2, any provisions of any code adopted pursuant to this chapter, or any state law regulating the construction industry, including F.S. Chapter 489 and Part I of Chapter 455. 
(5)  Abandoning a construction project in which the contractor is engaged or under contract as a contractor. A project shall be considered abandoned after ninety (90) days if the contractor terminates the project without just cause, or without proper notification to the owner, including the reason for termination, or fails to substantially perform work under the contract. Construction is considered to be commenced when the contract is executed and the contractor has accepted funds from the customer or lender. 
(6)  Using or attempting to use a certificate of competency, whether certified, registered or local, which has been suspended, revoked, placed inactive, expired or voluntarily surrendered. 
(7)  Refusing certified mail directed to the contractor by the Community Development Department. 
(8)  Failing to notify the Community Development Department in writing of any change in the physical address or mailing address of the business within thirty (30) days of said change. 
(9)  Failing to appear in person or through an attorney at any scheduled hearing on a complaint filed against the contractor. 
(10)  Failing to stop work on a project after being ordered to do so by the building official, building inspector or code compliance officer. 
(11)  Failing to comply with the provisions of this Code, section 3-2-48 regarding workers' compensation and liability insurance. 
(12)  Failing to register any local certificate of competency with the state when required to do so. 
(13)  If a state certified contractor, failing to register with Charlotte County prior to contracting or commencing work in Charlotte County. 
(14)  Failing to post any required building permit in a conspicuous place in front of the premises where the work is being performed. 
(15)  Failing to present for inspection any certificate of competency, along with proper identification, upon request of the building official, building inspector or code compliance officer. 
(16)  Failing to keep all payroll, including time cards and time sheets, salary, withholding tax, social security and FICA records pertaining to the workers on the job, and to make these documents available as required by section 3-2-5 of this chapter. 
(17)  Failing to cause to appear on any bid, business proposal, contract, newspaper advertisement, airwave transmission advertisement, paid telephone directory listing or other advertising medium used by the contractor, the certificate of competency number (license number) whether state or local. 
(18)  If the name of the business or type of work performed by the business appears on a vehicle, failing to also display the certificate of competency number (license number) in numbers and letters not less than two (2) inches in height, and in colors contrasting the background color. 
(19)  Failing to file with the building construction services department a subcontractor change form prior to permitting any subcontractor not on the subcontractor worksheet, or the most recent previously filed subcontractor change form, to work on the jobsite. 
(20)  Failing to obtain inspections including but not limited to final inspections. 
(21)  Swimming pool/spa water treatment provider failing to display pool sticker on vehicle used for pool/spa cleaning. 
(22)  Being convicted or found guilty of or entering a plea of nolo contendere to, regardless of adjudication, a crime in any jurisdiction which directly relates to the practice of contracting or the ability to practice contracting. 
(23)  Performing any act which assists a person or entity in engaging in the prohibited uncertified, unregistered or unlicensed practice of contracting, if the certificateholder or registrant knows or has reasonable grounds to know that the person or entity was uncertified, unregistered or unlicensed. 
(24)  Knowingly combining or conspiring with an uncertified unregistered person by allowing his or her certificate or registration to be used by the uncertified, unregistered or unlicensed person with intent to evade the provisions of this part. When a certificateholder or registrant allows his or her certificate or registration to be used by one or more business organizations without having any active participation in the operations, management, or control of such business organizations such act constitutes prima facie evidence of an intent to evade the provisions of this part. 
(25)  Acting in the capacity of a contractor under any certificate or registration issued hereunder except in the name of the certificateholder or registrant as set forth on the issued certificate or registration, or in accordance with the personnel of the certificateholder or registrant as set forth in the application for the certificate or registration, or as later changed as provided in this part. 
(26)  Committing mismanagement or misconduct in the practice of contracting that causes financial harm to a customer. Financial mismanagement or misconduct occurs when: 
1.  Valid liens have been recorded against the property of a contractor's customer for supplies or services ordered by the contractor for the customer's job; the contractor has received funds from the customer to pay for the supplies or services; and the contractor has not had the liens removed from the property, by payment or by bond, within 75 days after the date of such liens; 
2.  The contractor has abandoned a customer's job and the percentage of completion is less than the percentage of the total contract price paid to the contractor as of the time of abandonment, unless the contractor is entitled to retain such funds under the terms of the contract or refunds the excess funds within 30 days after the date the job is abandoned; or 
3.  The contractor's job has been completed, and it is shown that the customer has had to pay more for the contracted job than the original contract price, as adjusted for subsequent change orders, unless such increase in cost was the result of circumstances beyond the control of the contractor, was the result of circumstances caused by the customer, or was otherwise permitted by the terms of the contract between the contractor and the customer. 
(27)  Signing a statement with respect to a project or contract falsely indicating that the work is bonded; falsely indicating that payment has been made for all subcontracted work, labor, and materials which results in a financial loss to the owner, purchaser, or contractor; or falsely indicating that workers' compensation and public liability insurance are provided. 
(28)  Committing fraud or deceit in the practice of contracting. 
(29)  Committing incompetency or misconduct in the practice of contracting. 
(30)  Committing gross negligence, repeated negligence, or negligence resulting in a significant danger to life or property. 
(31)  Proceeding on any job without obtaining applicable local building department permits and inspections. 
(32)  Intimidating, threatening, coercing, or otherwise discouraging the service of a notice to owner under part I of chapter 713 or a notice to contractor under chapter 255 or part I of chapter 713. 
(33)  Failing to satisfy within a reasonable time, the terms of a civil judgment obtained against the licensee, or the business organization qualified by the licensee relating to the practice of the licensee's profession. 
(34)  Violating chapter 633 or the rules of the State Fire Marshal. 
(35)  Practicing beyond the scope of a certification or registration. 
(36)  Being disciplined by any municipality or county for a violation directly related to the practice of the licensee's profession. 
For the purposes of this subsection, construction is considered to be commenced when the contract is executed and the contractor has accepted funds from the customer or lender. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 16, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 84-14, § 1, 7-14-84; Ord. No. 84-15, § 2, 7-17-84; Ord. No. 88-45, § 11, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 92-16, § 11, 2-26-92; Ord. No. 92-86, §§ 7, 8, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 97-078, § 2, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2000-001, § 12, 1-11-00; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 10, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2014-012, § 10, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2017-002, § 1, 1-24-17) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 3-9. 
State Law reference— Felons, removal of disqualifications for employment, F.S. § 112.01; disciplinary proceeding, F.S. § 489.129. 
Sec. 3-2-48. - Workers' compensation, liability insurance generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any certificate holder to engage in the work of a contractor unless the following requirements as to insurance coverage have been complied with: 
(a)  The requirements of the Workers' Compensation Law of the State of Florida have been met. 
(b)  Said person maintains in an insurance company authorized to do business in state public liability insurance with minimum limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) in any accident, and property damage insurance with a minimum limit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one (1) accident, or three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit liability insurance. 
(c)  Said insurance certificate shall show the type of policy issued, the policy number(s), the name of both the insured and the insurer, the effective dates of the policy, and an agreement by the insurer to give thirty (30) days' written notice by mail to the building construction services department if the policy is canceled. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 17, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 12, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 92-86, § 9, 10-20-92; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
State Law reference— Workers' compensation, F.S. Ch. 440. 
Sec. 3-2-49. - Prior certificates. 
All current valid certificates of competency, whether active or inactive, issued under prior law are hereby ratified, confirmed and approved provided that the certificates are renewed pursuant to section 3-2-22. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 18, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 88-45, § 13, 12-20-88; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-50. - Reciprocity. 
Reciprocity shall be granted to those contractors who have passed an examination with a score of seventy-five (75) percent or better, prepared, protected and graded by testing companies approved by the licensing division. Evidence of obtaining a satisfactory score as described above shall be in the form of a letter, signed by the other jurisdiction's examination administrator or building department head, stating that the applicant has passed the examination with the requisite score of seventy-five (75) percent; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall eliminate the obligation of the applicant from complying with all other applicable portions of this chapter and the codes adopted hereunder. A reciprocal certificate of competency shall be issued only upon payment of an amount equal to the renewal fee for such certificate adopted by the board of county commissioners; such certificate of competency reciprocally granted may be revoked or suspended in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
If a contractor is state certified and applies to obtain a local certificate of competency, the business and law portion of the state exam will be reciprocated as long as the applicant has passed the exam, regardless of the score achieved. A score of at least seventy-five (75) percent must be obtained on the trade exam for which the applicant has applied. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 19, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 11, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 8, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-2-51. - Effect of certificate revocation. 
Revocation of any certificate of competency as provided in this chapter shall automatically revoke any county local business tax receipt that may have been issued to the holder of any such revoked certificate of competency. 
(Ord. No. 83-04, § 12, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, 5-12-09) 
Sec. 3-2-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-002, § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 2017, repealed former § 3-2-52 in its entirety which pertained to an optional file maintenance fee and derived from Ord. No. 2009-019, § 1, adopted May 12, 2009. 
Secs. 3-2-53—3-2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for mobile home or recreational vehicle, § 3-4-4. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to adopt technical codes, F.S. §§ 125.01(1)(i), 125.56; building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553; inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq. 

Sec. 3-2-66. - Appendices adopted. 
The following appendices to the Florida Building Code are hereby adopted: 
Appendix A, Weight of Building Materials; 
Appendix B, Chapter 9B-52 Florida Standard for Passive Radon-Resistant New Residential Building Construction; 
Appendix C, Chapter 9B-53 Standard for Mitigation of Radon in Existing Buildings; 
Appendix D, Standard for Rehabilitation; 
Appendix E, Chapter 9B-67 Florida Standard for Radon-Resistant New Commercial Building Construction; 
Appendix F, Map of Local Wind Speed Lines. 
(Res. No. 79-19, § 1, 3-6-79; Ord. No. 97-078, § 3, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2003-018, § 3, 4-22-03) 
Sec. 3-2-67. - Wind speed lines established. 
(a)  Risk Category I wind speed line is as depicted in Attachment A. 
(b)  Risk Category II wind speed line is as depicted in Attachment B. 
(c)  Risk Category III wind speed line is as depicted in Attachment C. 
(Res. No. 79-18, § 1, 3-6-79; Ord. No. 97-078, § 4, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 2003-018, § 3, 4-22-03; Ord. No. 2012-005, § 1, 3-13-12) 
Editor's note— Attachments A, B and C attached to Ordinance No. 2012-005 are available in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
Secs. 3-2-68—3-2-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 3-2-68, roof coverings, derived from Res. No. 78-66, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 1978; and Res. No. 87-262, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1987, was deleted by Ord. No. 98-039, § 3, adopted June 23, 1998. Ord. No. 2003-018, §§ 5—7, adopted Apr. 22, 2003, deleted §§ 3-2-69—3-2-71, which pertained to swimming pools and adopted and amended a general building code. Such sections were derived from Res. No. 78-65, § 1, adopted Sept. 26, 1978; and Res. No. 78-50, § 1 and Exh. A, adopted Aug. 8, 1978. Both ordinances were subsequently amended. See the Code Comparative Table at the back of Vol. II for complete derivation of such sections. 
Sec. 3-2-72. - Variances from the on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems ordinance. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the requirements imposed under the OSTDS ordinance adopted by the board of county commissioners as provided in such ordinance. The board of zoning appeals may grant variances from the requirements of the OSTDS ordinance in hardship cases which may be less restrictive than the provisions of the OSTDS ordinance; however, a variance may not be granted until the board of zoning appeals is satisfied that: 
(1)  The hardship was not caused intentionally by the action of the applicant; and 
(2)  There is no reasonable alternative, taking into consideration factors such as cost, for the treatment of the sewage; and 
(3)  The discharge from the subject on-site sewage treatment and disposal system will not adversely affect the health of the applicant or the public or significantly degrade the groundwater or surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 2016-024, § 9, 6-14-16) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2-73. - Hours of construction activity in residential areas. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Emergency work. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 
Person. Individuals, corporations, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates and all other groups and combinations thereof. 
Residential area. Any area which is zoned residential under the county zoning regulations. The residential zones are RE, RSF, RMF, RMF-T, MHP, MHS and MHC. Any creation of additional residential zones by amendment to the county zoning regulations or rezoning of property to residential status which occurs after the effective date of Ordinance No. 84-22 shall be automatically included in the residential area for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. Enforcement of this section shall be within the jurisdiction of the county code enforcement board pursuant to the same remedies and procedures that are used for enforcement of the county zoning regulations. 
(c)  Hours of certain construction work. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any machinery, demolition equipment, construction equipment, power tools, equipment of a semi-mechanical nature or otherwise undertake construction work which emits a sound plainly audible across the property line of an inhabited residential property in a residential area between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. However, this subsection shall not apply to the use of temporary pumps or other machinery which, because of its very nature and purpose, is required to operate twenty-four (24) hours a day. This subsection shall also not apply to any activity, noise or disturbance caused by emergency work. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring relief from the provisions of this section may apply for a variance pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 3-9-6.3 county zoning regulations in this Code. The board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from this section only if all of the following criteria are found to exist: 
(1)  The activity will be of a short duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this section; 
(2)  A strict adherence to the terms of this section would result in demonstrable and undue hardship to the applicant; and 
(3)  The granting of a variance would not be injurious to surrounding properties or contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 84-22, §§ 1—4, 8-14-84; Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 3-29-94; Ord. No. 2017-061, § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-17) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 3-9. 
Sec. 3-2-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-018, § 8, adopted Apr. 22, 2003, deleted § 3-2-74, existing buildings code, derived from Ord. No. 89-03, adopted Jan. 31, 1989; and Ord. No. 92-09, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Feb. 25-1992. 
Sec. 3-2-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-026, § 12, adopted Nov. 13, 2012 , deleted § 3-2-75, which pertained to the unsafe building abatement code and derived from Ord. No. 89-05, §§ 1 and 2, adopted Jan. 31, 1989. 
Sec. 3-2-76. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  Adopted. Subject to the amendments set forth in subsection (b), the International Property Maintenance Code, published and as amended updated from time to time by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Charlotte County Property Maintenance Code and shall be the governing law relative to structures and premises defined therein and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Amendments. The International Property Maintenance Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of Charlotte County, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Florida Building Code as amended. 
Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8, in addition to the Florida Building Code and the Florida Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code, the Florida Building Code and the referenced standards, the provisions of the Florida Building Code the Florida Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code shall apply. 
Section 103 Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 104.3 Right of entry is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be prosecuted by any method allowed by Florida Statutes and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Section 107.5 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Chapter 162, Florida Statutes and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Section 108.7 Record. The code official shall cause a report to be recorded in the Official Records of Charlotte County on the unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition. 
Section 110.1 General. The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official's judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction in accordance with the Florida Building Code, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the building official. 
Section 111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code compliance official or building official applying sections 108, 109, and 110 shall have the right to appeal to the Code Enforcement Special Magistrate, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
Sections 111.2 through Section 111.8 are deleted in their entirety. 
Section 302.4 Weeds is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 304.3 Premises Identification is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Throughout the year every openable window in a residential structure and every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilations of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing devise in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Sections 308.3.1 Garbage facilities and 308.3.2 Containers are deleted in their entirety. 
Section 606 Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters is deleted in its entirety. 
Chapter 7 Fire Safety Requirements is deleted in its entirety. 
Appendix A Boarding Standard is hereby adopted in its entirety. All references the International Building Code shall be replaced with the Florida Building Code. Section 11. Section 3-3-4, Adoption of code; exceptions, of Article I, Chapter 3-3 of the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, is hereby amended as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2010-032, §§ 1, 2, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 13, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 10, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Secs. 3-2-77—3-2-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GREEN BUILDING PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Article VI herein. 

Sec. 3-2-80. - Title. 
The provisions of Sections 3-2-80 through 3-2-89 inclusive shall be known as the Charlotte County "Livability/Green Building Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
FGBC: Acronym for the Florida Green Building Coalition, Inc., a Florida 501(c)3 not-for-profit corporation whose mission is to establish and maintain a Florida system of statewide green building standards and third party certification programs with environmental and economic benefits. 
Federal tax credit for energy efficient homes: Refers to the tax credit recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service for the construction of a home. 
Federal tax credit for solar energy systems: Refers to the tax credit recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service for the installation of qualified residential solar water heating or photovoltaic systems. 
Florida Solar Energy Center (FSEC): As the state of Florida's energy research institute, FSEC conducts research in building science, photovoltaics, solar thermal, hydrogen and alternative fuels, fuel cells and other advanced energy technologies. 
Florida Solar Energy System Incentives Program: A program of state law providing for rebates for the installation of qualified solar energy systems, codified at F.S. § 377.806. 
GBI: Acronym for the Green Building Initiative, a not-for-profit organization whose mission is to accelerate the adoption of building practices that result in energy-efficient, healthier and environmentally sustainable buildings by promoting credible and practical green building approaches for residential and commercial construction. 
Green building: A designation given to buildings that have achieved the requirements of a green building rating system defined in this green building program. 
Livability/Green Building Program: The program outlined in this ordinance for obtaining incentives for green buildings and developments. 
Green globes: The U.S. commercial/institutional building rating system administered by the Green Building Initiative. 
LEED: The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Rating System of the U.S. Green Building Council. 
NAHB: Acronym for the National Association of Home Builders, a Washington-based trade association whose mission is to enhance the climate for housing and the building industry. 
Project: Any construction associated with the creation, development, or erection of any building or development eligible for the program. 
Project Application Form: the form submitted indicating that an owner is interested in participating in the program for a particular project. 
Sustainable Construction: the process of environmentally sensitive, resource efficient site selection, preparation, design, construction, and operation of buildings. 
USGBC: Acronym for the United States Green Building Council, a non-profit organization whose mission is to transform the way buildings and communities are designed, built and operated, enabling an environmentally and socially responsible, healthy and prosperous environment that improves the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-82. - Designation of responsibility for administration and implementation. 
(a)  The community development department shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Marketing the Livability/Green Building Program to the community by any reasonably effective means, including, but not limited to, press releases, television advertising, or advertising in electronic or print mailers and the marketing incentives outlined in section 3-2-85; and 
(2)  Developing any appropriate or necessary application procedures, including but not limited to, the Livability/Green Building Program application form; and 
(3)  Writing policies and procedures for staff implementation of the Livability/Green Building Program; and 
(4)  Assisting in the development of incentives to award to any project that successfully satisfies the requirements associated with the Livability/ Green Building Program; and 
(5)  Review ordinances proposed for adoption by the board of county commissioners with the county department responsible for drafting the ordinance. Community development will review proposed ordinances for changes that include subject areas used by certification programs for conflicts and offer recommendations to make the ordinances more compatible with Green Building and livability standards. 
(b)  Any disputes regarding the administration of the Livability/Green Building Program may be appealed to the construction board of adjustment and appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-83. - Livability/Green Building Program applicability. 
(a)  For all private and county projects, the Livability/Green Building Program shall be voluntary; however, for projects voluntarily enrolled in the Livability/Green Building Program, Green Building certification by a third party certification organization and construction in accordance with the selected standard is mandatory. 
(b)  In accordance with F.S 255.257 (5) and F.S 255.253 (7), all county, municipal, school district, water management district, state university, community college, and state court buildings shall be constructed to comply with a sustainable building rating system or a national green building code 
(c)  For any renovation of a government building owned by the county undergoing a level III alteration as defined by the Florida Building Code, it is encouraged that in all cases, the county will utilize, to the maximum extent possible, livability and green building practices designed to save energy and water, reuse materials, reduce waste and pursue the high quality and durability of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-84. - Green building standards. 
In addition to the Florida Building Code's minimum standards, projects shall qualify for incentives by being certified using standards developed by the U.S. Green Building Council, the Green Building Initiative, the Florida Green Building Coalition, the National Association of Home Builders, the International Green Construction Code, or a nationally recognized, high-performance green building rating system as approved by the Green Building Program managing department. These standards shall apply to each category of construction as follows. 
(a)  New residential permitted projects: New residential projects shall satisfy all the requirements including, but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements associated with a nationally recognized green building rating system or a national model green building code such as: 
(1)  The current USGBC LEED for Homes® program, 
(2)  The current NAHB National Green Home program, or 
(3)  The GBI Green Globes new home designation, or 
(4)  The current Green Home Designation Standard of the FGBC. 
(b)  Remodeling of existing homes: The participant shall meet requirements of remodeling certification including, but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements associated with a nationally recognized green building rating system or a national model green building code such as: 
(1)  The current LEED for Homes® program, or 
(2)  The current NAHB National Green Home program, or 
(3)  The GBI Green Globes program, or 
(4)  The current Green Home Designation Standard of the FGBC, 35 including but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements. The home shall meet the requirements for "remodeling" or "existing home" of the designation. 
(c)  New commercial or institutional buildings: The program participant shall satisfy all of the requirements including, but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements associated with a nationally recognized green building rating system or a national model green building code such as: 
(1)  The current LEED for New Construction or applicable USGBC LEED rating system (e.g., LEED for Schools, LEED for Health Care), or 
(2)  The Green Globes environmental assessment system for new designs, or 
(3)  The current Green Commercial Designation Standard of the FGBC or, 
(4)  The Green Construction Code (IGCC). 
(d)  Existing commercial and institutional buildings: The program participant shall satisfy all of the requirements including, but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements associated with a nationally recognized green building rating system or a national model green building code such as: 
(1)  The current LEED for existing buildings or applicable USGBC LEED rating system (e.g., LEED for Schools, LEED for Health Care) program, or 
(2)  The Green Globes environmental assessment system for existing designs, or 
(3)  The current Green Commercial Designation Standard of the FGBC. 
(e)  Land developments: The participant shall satisfy all of the requirements including, but not limited to, any monetary or certification requirements associated with a nationally recognized green building rating system or a national model green building code such as: 
(1)  The current LEED for Neighborhoods and Developments rating system program, 
(2)  The NAHB development designation, or 
(3)  The current Green Development Designation Standard of the FGBC 23. 
(f)  Additional certification programs shall be considered eligible for incentives upon petition to the building construction services department and adoption by the board of county commissioners by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Sec. 3-2-85. - Incentives and program application. 
The program shall include incentives designed to encourage the use of the program. 
(a)  All projects. For any voluntary applicant seeking certification, the county shall provide fast-track permitting incentives. 
(b)  Marketing. The community development department in conjunction with the public information office and the Charlotte County economic development office may develop, when funding permits, a marketing program to promote green building in Charlotte County. The county may provide the following marketing incentives, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Providing an outdoor sign that a builder may use to promote a project under construction that is seeking certification under this program; 
(2)  The inclusion of program participants including developers, builders, material suppliers on a webpage dedicated to the program including website links to local sustainable businesses and green building materials suppliers; 
(3)  The creation of promotional packages such as a program logo for a program participant's advertisements or brochures and educational information for building owners demonstrating the benefits of green building; 
(4)  Press releases; and 
(5)  Special recognition awards to businesses, professionals, and individuals who exemplify green building. The recipients of the awards will be promoted by the county by methods deemed to be cost effective and beneficial for promoting Green Building. 
(c)  Incentives: The board of county commissioners may adopt by resolution monetary incentives if county budget funds permit. If monetary incentives are adopted, the board of county commissioners may include rebates or credits. 
(d)  Other incentives: Other incentives as may be approved by the board. 
(e)  Failure to receive green certification: Any project that fails to receive green certification from a rating agency shall not receive a reduction in any fees and shall be required to pay the total fee, in the case that a reduction in fees was offered as an incentive for joining the program. 
(f)  Damages or substantial improvements: Any project which received reductions in fees that is damaged or substantially improved by more than fifty (50) percent within five (5) years shall rebuild or build to green standards or shall repay the fee reductions in the case that a reduction in fees was offered as an incentive for joining the program. 
(g)  Collected penalties: Monetary penalties collected shall be used to fund the Green Building Program. 
(h)  The applicant is required to meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  An accredited professional or professional certifying agent for the Green Building rating system is a member of the design or construction team for the building; 
(2)  The building is designed to achieve certification; and 
(3)  The building is registered with the selected Green Building rating system for certification. 
(i)  Implementation: The Green Building Incentive program shall be implemented as follows: 
(1)  At the time of permit application, the applicant shall be required to submit the completed scorecard using the most recent version of the selected green building rating system along with the permit application. The green building rating system scorecard shall be accompanied by an explanation of how and why each credit can or cannot be achieved. The scorecard is the documentation supporting the applicant's request for participation in the livability/green building program and its incentives. 
(2)  The building registration and other required information shall be filed with the selected green building rating system before application for the building permit with the county and the applicant shall provide proof of registration at the time of building permit submittal. 
(3)  The proposed project construction documents (including the requested incentives) shall undergo the typical review process. If the county supports the project, it shall include appropriate building and site development language requiring that the green building components identified in the scorecard be constructed or installed in the building. 
(4)  The building and Livability/Green Building Program applications are approved, after the construction documents are reviewed to ensure inclusion of the approved green building components, which were previously identified in the scorecard. Permits shall not be issued unless the selected green building rating system approved components are included in the plan drawings or specifications. The county may utilize Green inspectors or professionals trained in the green building rating systems during review of the permit drawings and construction of the building. 
(5)  If during construction of the building, the applicant is unable to include all of the approved green building components previously identified in the scorecard, then the applicant shall be required to notify the community development department of the changes and their impact to the certification of the project. 
(6)  During plan review and construction, the green building accredited professional responsible for the certification shall provide documentation and submit regular reports to the county ensuring compliance or identifying areas of noncompliance with the standards and scorecard submitted with the application and the approved plans. If during construction, the applicant is unable to include required green building components, or if the responsible green building professional finds that the applicant failed to include these components, then the county shall pursue enforcement. 
(7)  The applicant is responsible for providing documentation of certification to the county, however documentation should be provided no later than ninety (90) days after the final inspection is completed. If a year of occupancy is required in order to earn the certification, the certification must be provided as soon as it is granted. However, no monetary incentives will be given until the actual certification is granted. 
(8)  Any development/building wherein the developer/builder has received incentives under this article shall include and make an irrevocable part of its covenants. Conditions and restrictions language shall be sufficient to insure that all buildings within the development or modification to the commercial building are constructed in accordance with green building standards of a nationally-recognized standard. This shall be considered a condition of the granting of the development/building permit, and as such shall be a permanent restriction and is not subject to change or alteration by any subsequent homeowners/tenants association. 
(j)  Demonstration of Compliance; Penalties. 
(1)  Failure to submit documentation of the required certification is a violation of the county regulations. The time requirement may be extended by the county building official on a showing of good faith effort to acquire the certification. 
(2)  Should the project not attain certification as attested to, the developer/builder will forfeit a penalty; however, the penalty may be returned if the board of county commissioners determine, after a public hearing, that extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the owner prevented the project from achieving the certification attested to by the owner. 
(3)  If, within ninety (90) days, or such longer period as the building official may allow for good cause, after initial notice from the building official of a penalty due under this subsection, the applicant demonstrates, through a supplemental report from the independent entity that provided the initial report, that it has made sufficient alterations or improvements to earn the required certification, or to earn more credits toward such a rating, then the penalty owing shall be eliminated or recalculated accordingly. The amount of the penalty as so predetermined shall be final. If the applicant does not submit a supplemental report in accordance with this subsection by the date required under this subsection, then the amount of the penalty as set forth in the building official's original notice shall be final. 
(4)  All funds received shall be used to support the Green Building Program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-86. - Certification. 
Projects that are voluntarily enrolled in the program and therefore voluntarily pursue certification shall be certified by an independent third party in accordance with the standards for the rating program indicated in the project application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-87. - Objectives, goals and education. 
(a)  Promote a sustainable future that meets today's needs of a stable, diverse and equitable economy while saving resources, protecting the quality of the air, water, land and other natural resources, conserving native vegetation, fish, wildlife habitat and other ecosystems. 
(b)  Deliver efficient projects, develop green buildings and water-thrifty landscapes, provide education and promote recycling and environmentally sound solid waste management. 
(c)  Promote economic and environmental health in the county, through education, marketing benefits and through the design, construction, operations and deconstruction of its own facilities. 
(d)  Provide leadership to both the private and public sectors in the arena of green building practices including resource efficiency and disaster mitigation. 
(e)  The county shall conduct training and outreach programs for the purpose of educating potential or current program participants about the program. 
(f)  The county shall attempt to make available a meeting space at a government facility when available for green building programs offered by organizations that are of a general nature (not product specific). 
(g)  County building and planning department staff shall be encouraged to attend at least two (2) hours of green building/design training per year if available and funded. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-2-88. - Program review. 
(a)  Staff review. The county shall conduct a review of the program to determine the need for changes in the program to increase its effectiveness. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of reviewing the program includes but is not limited to updating program incentives, recommending program or marketing changes to the county, reviewing suggestions made by program participants, and the green building awards of the program. 
(Ord. No. 2009-020, § 1, 5-12-09; Ord. No. 2013-012, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Secs. 3-2-89—3-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED AND VACANT PROPERTY ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3-2-111. - Title. 
The provisions of section 3-2-111 through section 3-2-123, inclusive, shall be known as the "Charlotte County Abandoned and Vacant Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-112. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners, through the adoption of this article, to establish a mechanism to protect residential and commercial neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of maintenance and security of abandoned properties; to establish an abandoned property registration program; to ensure properties are free of code violations and fees and fines prior to sale or occupation and to set forth guidelines for the maintenance of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-113. - Definitions. 
Certain words and phrases in sections 3-2-113 are defined, when used herein, as follows: 
Abandoned real property means any property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default or notice of mortgagee's sale by the lender or the subject of a tax lien certificate sale or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
Accessible property means a property that is physically accessible through a compromised or breached gate, fence, wall or other barriers, intended to provide physical security to the property, or by the absence of such barrier. 
Accessible structure means a structure or building that is unsecured, compromised or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition or circumstance that on its own, or combined with other conditions or circumstances present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that a property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not are limited to: overgrown or dead vegetation, including lawns, shrubbery and other plantings; accumulation of abandoned personal property, trash or waste; visible lack of maintenance of any building or structure on the property; graffiti on or other defacement of buildings or structures on the property; and any other condition or circumstance reasonably indicating that the property is not occupied. 
Foreclosure means the process, either judicial or extra-judicial, invoked by the owner or holder of a mortgage, by which a property placed as security for a real estate loan is sold at public or private sale to satisfy the debt of the borrower in the event of a default by the borrower under the terms of the promissory note or mortgage. 
Mortgagee means the person or entity that is the owner or holder of a mortgage, deed of trust or similar instrument encumbering real property as security for a promissory note or other debt. 
Property manager means a property manager, property management or maintenance company, or similar person or entity responsible for the maintenance of real property as agent of an owner, mortgagee or other responsible party. 
Owner means a person or entity that either holds record fee simple title to a parcel of real property, or holds record beneficial ownership of that parcel of real property under the terms of a trust or similar instrument of title. 
Responsible party means either: (1) the owner of a vacant parcel of real property; or, (2) the holder or owner of the mortgage, deed of trust or similar instrument encumbering real property ("mortgagee") during any time when an owner of real property is in default under the terms of that mortgage, deed of trust or similar instrument; or (3) both the owner and the mortgagee. 
Vacant property means any property, including any building or structure thereon, that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-114. - Parties responsible for compliance. 
(a)  The responsible party, as defined in this article, shall comply with all provisions of this article, including but not limited to, maintenance of real property for which they are responsible in accordance with the provisions of this article, and in accordance with all other applicable provisions of the local, state and federal law. 
(b)  In all instances, the responsibility of a mortgagee to comply with this article shall be and remain in effect from the date that the mortgagee gives the owner notice of a default under the terms of the mortgage, or files a Notice of Lis Pendens, whichever first occurs, until such time as the subject property is sold or transferred to a new owner, or until any foreclosure action is dismissed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-115. - Registration of abandoned real properties or real property at risk of abandonment. 
(a)  Any owner of property located within the county who has abandoned real property or who intends to abandon that real property shall immediately register the property with the county administrator or the county administrator's designee. Registration fees will be waived for single-family homeowners who resided in the home until the property was vacated for the first year of registration. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a Notice of Lis Pendens or an action to foreclose upon a mortgage or other similar instrument of debt, which debt is secured by real property located within the county, the holder or owner of said mortgage or other debt instrument, or the party bringing the foreclosure action, shall immediately register the property with the county administrator or the county administrator's designee. 
(c)  The registration of property required in the article shall be upon such forms as are designated by the county administrator or the county administrator's designee and shall be accompanied by the approved registration fee as established in this section 3-2-115. The county shall provide for electronic registration. 
(d)  Registration by an owner shall contain the name of the owner, the address of the property, the owner's forwarding address and a telephone number at which the owner can be reached in the future. In addition, the registration shall contain the name, address and telephone number of any mortgagee. Any owner who registers a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(e)  Registration by a mortgagee shall contain the name of the mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee, the name and direct telephone number of mortgagee's designated contact person, a facsimile number and e-mail address. In addition, the registration shall include the same contact information for any property manager or other party responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. Any mortgagee that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(f)  A copy of the registration shall be posted by the responsible party upon the property in a prominent and conspicuous location in a weatherproof enclosure accessible to personnel of the county. 
(g)  For so long as the property remains vacant, or subject to a Notice of Lis Pendens or a foreclosure action, a registration fee shall be due from the owner or other responsible party, as applicable under the circumstances, each year not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the original registration was made. The annual registration fee for the first year is hereby set at one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per property. Thereafter, the annual registration fee per property for each successive year shall be as set forth below: 
$250.00 for the second year; 
$500.00 for the third year; 
$1000.00 for the fourth year; 
$2000.00 for the fifth year; 
$4000.00 for the sixth year; and 
$4000.00 for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 14, 11-13-12; Ord. No. 2013-020, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 3-2-116. - Inspection obligations of mortgagee. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the county shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon default by the mortgagor, prior to the issuance of a notice of default. 
(i)  If a property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, as defined in this article, it shall be deemed abandoned and the mortgagee shall comply with the registration requirements of section 3-2-115, within ten (10) days of the inspection. 
(ii)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected by the mortgagee or the mortgagee's designee monthly until either: (1) the mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy. 
(b)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the county which is in default and the subject of an outstanding notice of default, Notice of Lis Pendens or foreclosure action as of August 1, 2010, shall perform an inspection of the property by September 1, 2010. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed abandoned and the mortgagee shall register the property in accordance with section 3-2-115, within ten (10) days of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-117. - Maintenance requirements. 
The responsible party shall have the following obligations with respect to maintaining property that is subject to this article: 
(a)  Properties shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by federal, state, or local law), discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Front, side and rear yard landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the county's standard at the time registration was required. 
(d)  Items considered to be "landscaping" shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf. 
(e)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, items such as the following: watering, cutting and mowing of landscaping, removal of yard waste and debris, exterior painting, glass replacement, repairs to a building or other structure, or other acts reasonably necessary to maintain acceptable cosmetic appearance of the property, including any building or structure on the property, and to maintain the structural integrity of any building or structure on the property, and to comply with applicable provisions of the Charlotte County Code and other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(f)  Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(g)  Failure of the owner or mortgagee or other responsible party to properly maintain the property shall be a violation of the County Code of Ordinances. Enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be accomplished in the same manner as for other violations of the County Code, but such enforcement shall not be the county's exclusive remedy, it being the intent of the county to make use of any and all available remedies under this article or under other provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-118. - Security requirements. 
(a)  The responsible party shall secure properties subject to this article so they are not accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  "Secure", as used in subsection (a) above, means the closing and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow access to enclosed areas of the property or to buildings and structures on the property. Walls and fences surrounding the property or any portion of the property shall be maintained in good repair. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing; boarding of broken windows shall be used only as a temporary corrective measure and shall be secured in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code. Once a structure is occupied, all boarded openings must be repaired with glazing or new windows and doors. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-119. - Additional authority as to maintenance and security. 
The county administrator, or the county administrator's designee, shall have authority to require the owner, mortgagee and other responsible parties to implement additional maintenance and security measures as may be reasonably required to prevent further decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-120. - Property managers. 
(a)  The owner, the mortgagee or other responsible party may elect to use a property manager for purposes of complying with the requirements of this article, and any other laws applicable to the property, but such election shall not relieve the owner, mortgagee or other responsible party from liability for compliance with this article. If a property manager is being used for purposes of complying with this article, the name, address, telephone number and other pertinent contact information identifying the property manager shall be included in the registration of the property required under this article. 
(b)  A property manager accepting appointment as the agent of the owner, the mortgage or other responsible party shall inspect the property not less than bi-weekly during the months of March to October to ensure that the property is in compliance with this article. 
(c)  If inspection reveals noncompliance, the property manager shall immediately give written notice of the noncompliance to the owner, the mortgagee or other responsible party, who shall have ten (10) business days to begin the action necessary to bring the property into compliance, and not more than thirty (30) days to complete such action. The county administrator or the county administrator's designee may extend the compliance time period upon showing unreasonableness of the time frame for the existing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-121. - Enforcement; notice of prohibited conditions. 
(a)  Enforcement. Code compliance officers are directed and empowered to investigate and enforce the provisions of this article. They are authorized to inspect any property where a violation of this article is alleged to exist. Code compliance officers may take code enforcement actions in accordance with chapter 162, Florida Statutes or section 1-1-15, Charlotte County Code for properties found to be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-122. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Property shall be exempt from the registration requirement of this article if either of the following two (2) conditions exist. 
(1)  The property was not the subject of foreclosure and is listed in the applicable multiple listing service or other substantial competent evidence of actively marketing the property is provided and the property has not remained vacant more than one hundred eighty (180) days and the outward appearance is being maintained; or 
(2)  The property is under construction and the contractor has applied for and is covered by an inspection extension program. 
(b)  At such time either qualifications for exemption ceases to exist, the property shall be subject to the registration requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Sec. 3-2-123. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the mortgagee as a result of a foreclosure sale, and to property transferred to the mortgagee by a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure or sale. 
(b)  This article shall be considered cumulative and not superseding of, or subject to, any other law or provision relating to the same subject, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to the county above and beyond any other state, county or local law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-031, § 1, 7-13-10) 
Secs. 3-2-124—3-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTRICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Cable television, § 1-10-161 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to adopt technical codes, F.S. § 125.01(1)(i); building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553; inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq; furnishings copies of local codes, F.S. § 553.23. 

Secs. 3-2-141—3-2-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 3-2-141—3-2-143 were deleted by Ord. No 2003-018, § 12, adopted Apr. 22, 2003. Such sections pertained to the adoption and amendment of an electrical code and required a one-line diagram and load calculation for certain electrical service installations. See the Code Comparative Tables at the back of Vol. II for complete derivation of such provisions. 
Sec. 3-2-144. - Electrical fees. 
Electrical fees shall be established by resolution of the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 94-45, § 4, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 97-007, § 10, 3-4-97) 
Sec. 3-2-145. - Change in occupancy. 
Whenever a change in occupancy of a commercial or industrial building or place of public assembly occurs or if there is a change in tenants or owners, the electric service should be disconnected. Prior to reconnection, the tenant/owner shall be required to obtain a "commercial change of occupancy permit" from the community development department. The county inspectors will inspect the vacated premises to determine if the electrical service/wiring, building structure, plumbing, fire and zoning codes are adequate for the new tenant and free from hazard to life and property. In the event the electric power is not disconnected, the tenant/owner will still be required to obtain the necessary permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 11, 3-4-97) 
Sec. 3-2-146. - Temporary work. 
All temporary work shall be required to secure a permit and an electrical inspection is required for installing a temporary work, radio transmitting stations, receiving stations, carnivals, circuses, road shows and similar installations. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 12, 3-4-97) 
Sec. 3-2-147. - Change from residential use. 
Existing residential dwelling units or structures, and accessory buildings thereto, including private garages in a commercial, office, medical, institutional (OMI), or industrial zoning district shall be allowed to utilize the existing wiring therein if the minimum standards of the latest adopted edition of the National Electric Code are met. Provided, however, that the wiring in any alterations or additions to such a structure must comply with the standards of the latest adopted edition of the National Electric Code, including local amendments, for commercial occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 97-007, § 13, 3-4-97) 
Secs. 3-2-148—3-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, adopted March 8, 2016, repealed Art. VIII, §§ 3-2-156—3-2-182, which pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. No. 2003-020, § 1, adopted April 22, 2003; Ord. No. 2003-066, §§ 1—9, adopted Sept. 23, 2003; and Ord. No. 2004-056, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2004. 

Secs. 3-2-156—3-2-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 28, 2015, repealed Art. IX, §§ 3-2-186—3-2-201, which pertained to tree requirements. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 

Secs. 3-2-186—3-2-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - BUILDING NUMBERING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-57, adopted July 11, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—10 as Ch. 3-2, Art. X, §§ 3-2-211—3-2-220, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-2-211. - Intent. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to require all structures, buildings and dwellings in the county to be readily identifiable by street number to persons providing emergency services. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 1, 7-11-89) 
Cross reference— Emergencies, Ch. 2-1. 
Sec. 3-2-212. - Exhibition of street numbers. 
Every structure, building and dwelling in the county shall, in accordance with this article, exhibit the street number assigned by the zoning department to such structure, building or dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 2, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-213. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground, or requiring construction or erection on the ground. 
(b)  Building shall mean any permanent structure, having a roof impervious to weather, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or property of any kind, excluding garages, storage sheds, barns, tents and cabanas. 
(c)  The county shall mean the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County. 
(d)  Dwelling unit shall mean a room or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for a family, for owner occupancy or rental or lease, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing sleeping and sanitary facilities and one (1) kitchen. 
(e)  One-family dwelling shall mean a building containing only one (1) dwelling unit. 
(f)  Two-family dwelling shall mean a building containing two (2) dwelling units. 
(g)  Multiple-family dwelling shall mean a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
(h)  Commercial building shall mean any structure or building which is not a one-, two—or multiple-family dwelling. 
(i)  Detached accessory structure shall mean a structure such as an entrance gate or fence, which is customarily incidental or subordinate to the principal structure located on the same property. 
(j)  Owner shall mean any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trusts, corporations, associations or other organizations who own the free title to, or have an undivided interest in, any structure or property which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Occupant shall mean any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation, association or other entity who is occupying or leasing a building or dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 3, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-214. - Size and visibility of street numbers. 
In accordance with the Florida Building Code all new numbering for addressing of one- and two-family dwellings shall be posted with street numbers not less than four (4) inches in height and one-half (½) inch in width. All commercial buildings and multiple-family dwellings shall be posted with street numbers not less than six (6) inches in height. All street numbers shall be posted so as to be clearly visible from any roadway or street serving such building or dwelling. All numbers required by this article shall be Arabic numerals and shall be of a contrasting color with the background of the surface to which such numbers are affixed. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 4, 7-11-89; Ord. No. 2012-026, § 15, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 3-2-215. - Placement of street numbers. 
The property owner or occupant of every structure, building or dwelling in the county shall place the street numbers assigned to such structure, building or dwelling at any of the following sites or combinations of sites. If such site has a detached accessory structure that is located between the principal dwelling and the roadway or street serving the principal dwelling, the location shall render the street numbers clearly visible from the edge of such roadway or street. 
(1)  One-family dwelling: The street numbers shall be placed on the principal dwelling, attached garage, or detached accessory structure. 
(2)  Two-family dwelling: The street numbers shall be placed on each dwelling unit, attached garage, or detached accessory structure. If such site is the dwelling unit or attached garage, such location shall clearly identify each dwelling unit from the other, using the street numbers and suffix "A" or "B." 
(3)  Multiple-family dwelling: The street numbers shall be placed on or immediately adjacent to the sign identifying such multiple-family dwelling. Where the multiple-family dwelling consists of two (2) or more separate buildings, and is assigned a common street number, such buildings shall be identified by using either an alphabetic or numeric designation or a combination thereof, and shall be placed on each separate building. Apartments shall be identified by an alphabetic or numeric suffix placed on the entrance to each apartment. 
(4)  Commercial buildings: The specific site at which the street numbers shall be placed on commercial buildings shall be determined by the owner or occupant of such commercial building, provided that the provisions of section 3-2-214 of this article are complied with. The units shall be identified by an alphabetic or numeric suffix placed on each entrance to places of business. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 5, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-216. - New construction. 
Prior to final inspection, it shall be the duty of the contractors of every new structure, building or dwelling constructed in the county to place the street numbers assigned to such new structure, building or dwelling, as required by sections 3-2-214 and 23-2-25 of this article. A certificate of occupancy (CO), shall not be issued until such time as the assigned street number is posted to a new structure, building or dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 6, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-217. - Removal of old numbers. 
It shall be the duty of each property owner or occupant upon receiving notice of a new street address, or upon affixing a new street number, to remove from the structure, building or dwelling any number different that might be mistaken for or confused with the new number so assigned or posted. 
Any structure, building or dwelling on which the street number is in script writing may continue to display the numbering system, but shall also place the street number in arabic numerals as required by sections 3-2-114 and 3-2-115 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 7, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-218. - Variances. 
The director of the zoning department, or his designee, may authorize, upon application by the owner or occupant, and payment of the application fee as determined by the board of county commissioners, such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions peculiar to the structure or the property on which such structure is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A denial by the zoning official, or his designee, may be appealed to the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 8, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-219. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the director of the division of community development to ensure that the provisions of this article are enforced. 
(1)  The building department shall approve the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for a newly constructed one-, two-or multiple-family dwelling, or commercial building, provided the provisions of sections 3-2-114 and 3-2-115 of this article are complied with. 
(2)  The zoning department shall approve the issuance of a CO for a commercial name change that changes the principal use of an existing structure, provided the provisions of sections 3-2-144 and 3-2-115 of this article are complied with. 
(3)  If a violation of this article is found to exist, the zoning official or his designee shall notify the property owner or occupant of the violation in writing. Should written notification fail to result in compliance with this article within a reasonable time, the zoning official or his designee shall request legal action pursuant to the rules of procedure for the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 9, 7-11-89) 
Sec. 3-2-220. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties pursuant to F.S. Chapter 162, and any county ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 89-57, § 10, 7-11-89) 
ARTICLE XI. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - ADMINISTRATION 
Subdivision 1. - General 

Sec. 3-2-221. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of Charlotte County, Florida hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-222. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-223. - Intent. 
The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-224. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-225. - Warning. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-226. - Disclaimer of liability. 
This article shall not create liability on the part of the Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 2. - Applicability 

Sec. 3-2-227. - General. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-228. - Areas to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within Charlotte County, Florida, as established in section 3-2-229 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-229. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
The flood insurance study for Charlotte County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated May 5, 2003, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Charlotte County Community Development Department, 18400 Murdock Circle, Port Charlotte, Florida 33948. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-230. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to division 1, subdivision 5 of this article, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-231. - Other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-232. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this article and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-233. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 3. - Duties and Powers of the Floodplain Administrator 

Sec. 3-2-234. - Designation. 
The Charlotte County Building Official is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-235. - General. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to division 1, subdivision 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-236. - Applications and permits. 
The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-237. - Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2022-055, § 1, 11-8-22) 
Sec. 3-2-238. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to division 1, subdivision 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-239. - Notices and orders. 
The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-240. - Inspections. 
The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in division 1, subdivision 6 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-241. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 3-2-237 of this article; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of Charlotte County, Florida are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on flood insurance rate maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-242. - Floodplain management records. 
Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood-carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at Charlotte County Community Development, 18400 Murdock Circle, Port Charlotte, Florida 33948. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 4. - Permits 

Sec. 3-2-243. - Permits required. 
Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-244. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-245. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-246. - Application for a permit or approval. 
To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by Charlotte County. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in division 1, subdivision 5 of this article. 
(5)  Include a signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) for projects proposing to enclose areas under elevated buildings that exceed six (6) feet above the highest adjacent grade which shall be recorded in the Charlotte County official records prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(6)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(7)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(8)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-247. - Validity of permit or approval. 
The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-248. - Expiration. 
A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-249. - Suspension or revocation. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-250. - Other permits required. 
Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Southwest Florida Water Management District or the South Florida Water Management District as applicable; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 5. - Site Plans and Construction Documents 

Sec. 3-2-251. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with section 3-2-252(2) or (3) of this article. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 3-2-252(1) of this article. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the coastal construction control line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, if applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this article but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-252. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). 
Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
(a)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
(b)  Specify that the base flood elevation is three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than three (3) feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-253. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 3-2-254 of this article and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 3-2-254 of this article. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-254. - Submission of additional data. 
When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 6. - Inspections 

Sec. 3-2-255. - General. 
Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-256. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-257. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-258. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 3-2-252(3)(b) of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-259. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 3-2-258 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-260. - Manufactured homes. 
The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, a certification of elevation from the bottom of the frame shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Subdivision 7. - Variances and Appeals 

Sec. 3-2-261. - General. 
The construction industry licensing board (CILB) shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the CILB shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-262. - Appeals. 
The CILB shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this article. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-263. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
The CILB shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 3-2-267 of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 3-2-268 of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The CILB has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-264. - Restrictions in floodways. 
A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 3-2-253 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-265. - Historic buildings. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-266. - Functionally dependent uses. 
A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 3-2-264, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-267. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
In reviewing requests for variances, the CILB shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this article, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-268. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the CILB that: 
(a)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
(b)  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
(c)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 8. - Violations 

Sec. 3-2-269. - Violations. 
Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-270. - Authority. 
For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-271. - Unlawful continuance. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
Subdivision 1. - General 

Sec. 3-2-272. - Scope. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-273. - Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-274. - Terms not defined. 
Where terms are not defined in this article or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 2. - Definitions 

Sec. 3-2-274.5. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled flood resistant design and construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "one-hundred-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Coastal construction control line. The line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a one-hundred-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
Coastal high hazard area. A special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V zones" and are designated on flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) as zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
Declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement). A form provided by the floodplain administrator to be signed by the owner and recorded in the Charlotte County Official Records, whereby the owner agrees not to convert or modify enclosures below elevated buildings in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the building permit and these regulations. 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two (2) feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 6, 1971. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F). A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of forty-five (45) square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than twelve (12) persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after August 6, 1971 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01.] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01.] 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Sand dunes. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.]. 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this article, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this article or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21; Ord. No. 2022-055, § 1, 11-8-22) 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
Subdivision 1. - Buildings and Structures 

Sec. 3-2-275. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
Pursuant to section 3-2-245 of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of division 3, subdivision 7 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-276. - Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in F.S. § 161.54, shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this article and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 2. - Subdivisions 

Sec. 3-2-277. - Minimum requirements. 
Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-278. - Subdivision plats. 
Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 3-2-252(1) of this article; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of division 3, subdivision 3 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 3. - Site Improvements, Utilities and Limitations 

Sec. 3-2-279. - Minimum requirements. 
All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; and 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-280. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-281. - Water supply facilities. 
All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-282. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 3-2-253(1) of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-283. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, fill shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary and must meet BOTH of the following two (2) provisions: 
(1)  The maximum allowable slope from the structure to the property line shall be no greater than 6:1, and; 
(2)  The maximum amount of fill added to a site shall be no more than four (4) feet measured from the average grade at the property line. 
The amount of fill and proposed slope shall be included in construction drawings and the applicant will be required to provide as built drawings confirming compliance with both provisions prior to final inspections. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-284. - Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 3-2-253(4) of this article demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 3-2-307(3) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 4. - Manufactured Homes 

Sec. 3-2-285. - General. 
All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this article. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-286. - Foundations. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this article. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (zone V) are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, repealed the former § 3-2-286 which pertained to limitations on installation in coastal high hazard areas (zone V), and derived from Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, adopted March 8, 2016. In addition, the same ordinance renumbered the former § 3-2-287 as § 3-2-286, as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-2-287. - Anchoring. 
All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, renumbered the former § 3-2-287 as § 3-2-286, and the former § 3-2-288 as § 3-2-287, as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-2-288. - Elevation. 
All manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved in flood hazard areas shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation requirement, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V and Coastal A Zone). 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, renumbered the former § 3-2-288 as § 3-2-287, and the former § 3-2-289 as § 3-2-288, as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-2-289. - Enclosures. 
Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, renumbered the former § 3-2-289 as § 3-2-288, and the former § 3-2-292 as § 3-2-289, as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-2-290. - Utility equipment. 
Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, 5-25-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, repealed the former § 3-2-290 which pertained to general elevation requirement, and derived from Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, adopted March 8, 2016. In addition, the same ordinance renumbered the former § 3-2-293 as § 3-2-290, as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-2-291. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-019, § 1, adopted May 25, 2021, repealed § 3-2-291, which pertained to elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions and derived from Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, adopted March 8, 2016. 
Secs. 3-2-292, 3-2-293. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's notes at §§ 3-2-289 and 3-2-290. 
Subdivision 5. - Recreational Vehicles and Park Trailers 

Sec. 3-2-294. - Temporary placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-295. - Permanent placement. 
Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 3-2-294 of this article for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of division 3, subdivision 4 of this article for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 6. - Tanks 

Sec. 3-2-296. - Underground tanks. 
Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-297. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 3-2-298 of this article shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-298. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to an elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-299. - Tank inlets and vents. 
Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Subdivision 7. - Other Development 

Sec. 3-2-300. - General requirements for other development. 
All development, including manmade changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 3-2-282 of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-301. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 3-2-282 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-302. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 3-2-282 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-303. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one (1) side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 3-2-282 of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 3-2-253 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-304. - Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four (4) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-305. - Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-306. - Other development in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-307. - Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (zone V). 
In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one (1) unit vertical to five (5) units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 2, 3-8-16) 
Secs. 3-2-308—3-2-320. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-2-321. - Residential technical amendments. 
The Florida Building Code, Residential is hereby amended by the following technical amendments. 
R322.2.2 Enclosed areas below design flood elevation. Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the design flood elevation shall: 
1.  Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators, unless a partition is required by the fire code. The limitation on partitions does not apply to load bearing walls interior to perimeter wall (crawlspace) foundations. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises or entry to the building (stairway and/or elevator). 
2.  Be provided with flood openings that meet the following criteria: 
1.1.  There shall be a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosed area below the design flood elevation, each area shall have openings on exterior walls. 
1.2.  The total net area of all openings shall be at least 1 square inch (645 mm 2 ) for each square foot (0.093 m 2 ) of enclosed area, or the openings shall be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement by a registered design professional that the design of the openings will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters as specified in Section 2.6.2.2 of ASCE 24. 
1.3.  The bottom of each opening shall be 1 foot (305 mm) or less above the adjacent ground level. 
1.4.  Openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in any direction in the plane of the wall. 
1.5.  Any louvers, screens or other opening covers shall allow the automatic flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area. 
1.6.  Openings installed in doors and windows, that meet requirements 2.1 through 2.5, are acceptable; however, doors and windows without installed openings do not meet the requirements of this section. 
R322.3.4 Walls below design flood elevation. Walls are permitted below the elevated floor, provided that such walls are not used to partition the space below the elevated floor and are not part of the structural support of the building or structure and: safe loading resistance of not less than 10 (470 Pa) and no more than 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa); or 
4.  Where wind loading values of this code exceed 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa), the construction documents shall include documentation prepared and sealed by a registered design professional that: 
4.1.  The walls below the design flood elevation have been designed to collapse from a water load less than that which would occur during the design flood. 
4.2.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system have been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the design flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by this code. 
R322.3.5 Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation. Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators, unless a partition is required by the fire code. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises or entry to the building (stairway and/or elevator). 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 3, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-322. - Building administrative amendments. 
The Florida Building Code, Building is hereby amended by the following administrative amendments. 
Modify Section 107.3.5 as follows: 
107.3.5 Minimum plan review criteria for buildings. 
Commercial Buildings: Building 
8.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Flood requirements in accordance with Section 1612, including lowest floor elevations, enclosures, declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement), flood damage-resistant materials. 
Residential (one- and two-family) 
6.  Structural requirements shall include: 
Flood hazard areas, flood zones, design flood elevations, lowest floor elevations, enclosures, declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) for enclosures that exceed six (6) feet in height above the lowest adjacent grade, equipment, and flood damage-resistant materials. 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 4, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 3-2-323. - Building technical amendments. 
The Florida Building Code, Building is hereby amended by the following technical amendments. 
Add Section 1612.4.3 as follows: 
1612.4.3  Additional requirements for enclosed areas. In addition to the requirements of ASCE 24, enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the building (stairway and/or elevator). 
(Ord. No. 2016-014, § 5, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2022-055, § 1, 11-8-22) 
Sec. 3-2-324. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2022-055, § 1, adopted Nov. 8, 2022, repealed § 3-2-324, which pertained to existing building technical amendments and derived from Ord. No. 2016-014, § 6, adopted March 8, 2016. 
Chapter 3-3 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; housing, Ch. 1-8; parks and recreation, Ch. 1-11; solid waste, Ch. 1-12; emergencies, Ch. 2-1; fire protection, Ch. 2-2; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 2-4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; mobile homes, Ch. 3-4; water and sewers, Ch. 3-8; fire districts, Ch. 4-3; liquefied petroleum gas distributors, installers, manufacturers, § 1-10-43; Charlotte Public Safety Unit, § 4-3-211 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power of board of commissioners to provide fire protection, F.S. § 125.01(1)(d); explosives, F.S. Ch. 552; forest protection, F.S. Ch. 590; fire prevention and control, F.S. Ch. 633; sale of fireworks, F.S. § 791; authority of county to adopt technical codes, F.S. §§ 125.01(1)(i), 125.56. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II of this chapter, § 3-3-21 et seq. 

Sec. 3-3-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Violation unlawful; variances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter or any code adopted hereunder or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provisions hereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any provisions or regulations except as authorized by variances allowed in writing by the director of the county fire prevention bureau. Variances from the requirements for fire hydrant service shall be granted only by the board of appeals for fire prevention after hearing, if 
(1)  Fire hydrant service from a public utility or municipal service agency is reasonably expected within twelve (12) months; or 
(2)  The property owner applying for hydrant service will be subject to utility charges which impose the full cost of the hydrant installation on that single property and which cost is not allocated among all of the lots, parcels or property to be served by the new hydrant. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to require a hydrant where the lot to be developed is not within an area assigned by certificate to a water utility, or where the area is served by a municipally owned water utility, or by a utility not regulated by Charlotte County. 
(c)  Evidence. Proof of any unlawful act or failure to comply with this chapter shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner/occupant or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
(d)  Technical code violation. This chapter shall be deemed a technical code for purposes of enforcement, and violations will be subject to the penalties and procedures provided in Chapter 162, Florida Statutes. Enforcement procedures will not, however, be deemed to stand in place of or be followed prior to any other proceedings or court actions provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, §§ 2, 11, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 85-9, § 3, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 85-35, § 2, 10-1-85) 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Purpose; construction. 
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the county for the promotion and preservation of the public health, safety, comfort, order, appearance, convenience, morals and general welfare, as authorized by F.S. section 163.295, and all the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 10, 7-13-82) 
Sec. 3-3-4. - Adoption of code; exceptions. 
The latest edition of the Florida Fire Prevention Code, and its incorporated standards and codes as published in the National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association, are hereby adopted. Charlotte County has adopted the following NFPA Standards/Codes not listed under the Florida Fire Prevention Code; the editions may change due to updated codes set forth by NFPA. All NFPA Standards/Codes editions in the Florida Fire Prevention Code have been adopted by the State of Florida and shall remain until the updated edition of the Florida Fire Prevention Code has been adopted by the State of Florida. 
(1)  NFPA Standard 24 Private Fire Service Mains shall be applicable only in the unincorporated areas of the county where: 
a.  Water is being supplied through a system of lines above or below ground level which is capable of providing the flows required by NFPA Standard 24as appropriate to the area served. 
b.  Water is being supplied by a system of lines which does not have the flow volume to meet the criteria in subparagraph (1)a above in all circumstances, but which can meet such criteria in some portion of the system. Such systems are required to meet the requirements of NFPA Standard 24 wherever they are capable of being met. In instances where those criteria cannot be met through the supply of water produced by the system, the supply shall be supplemented by the requirements of NFPA Standard 1142. 
c.  Water is being supplied through a system of lines large enough from a volumetric standpoint in some parts of the system to meet the criteria discussed in subparagraph (1)a above were it uniform throughout, but which does not have the capacity to meet such criteria currently. Such a system must meet the same criteria as shown in subparagraph (1)b above. 
d.  In those areas where new systems are extended or built, they shall meet the requirements of NFPA Standard 24. 
(2)  NFPA Standard 1142 shall be applicable in the following areas: 
a.  Where no water lines are available to provide fire flow to a customer as long as: 
1.  The area for which fire flow is required is not within the certificated area of any utility, or is within such certificated area, but the extension of water lines has been found not economically feasible by the board; and 
2.  The user of fire flow has attempted to obtain extension of service outside a certificated utility's service area and has been refused. 
b.  Where water lines exist which are inadequate to provide the flows required as shown in (2)a above. In that case, NFPA Standard 1142 will be used for purposes of supplementing those lines in order to achieve an acceptable level of fire protection. See subparagraph (2)b above. 
Any person, firm, corporation, limited to general partnership, joint-stock company, business trust, or joint venture constructing, installing or extending any new water main or mains shall notify the fire marshal in writing and submit any new plans for such additions for his inspection and determination that the same shall be capable of carrying the flows required by NFPA Standard 24, as appropriate to the area served, whether or not the water system to which the new water main or mains will connect is capable of supplying the flows required by NFPA Standard 24. Such plans shall be certified by a professional engineer. However, this paragraph shall not be construed to take precedence over, or in any way vitiate, any existing agreement or agreements entered into pursuant to section 3-7-8(i) of this Code of Laws and Ordinances or any development order issued by the county, the state or any agency of the government of the United States. No building permit shall be issued by the director of the building department, and no right-of-way permit for water lines shall be issued by the director of the land development department unless the fire marshal has approved such permits under the provisions of this chapter. The current edition of NFPA Standard 24, as shown in Appendix A to Ordinance No. 85-9, shall be amended by the addition of the following requirements: 
2-1 In addition to meeting American Water Works Association specifications, all new installations of hydrants shall: 
(a)  Have two (2) 2½ inch and one (1) 4 inch nozzles with NHS threads (NFPA 1963). 
(b)  Have a pentagonal operating nut and hydrant caps. 
(c)  Have a hydrant valve opening sufficient to provide required fire flows. 
(d)  Have an operating nut which opens when turned counterclockwise. 
2-2 All fire hydrants must be provided with an independent gate valve. 
2-3 Hydrants in high traffic areas shall be protected with four (4) bollards, each six (6) inch in diameter, and shall be three (3) feet above grade and three (3) feet below grade and filled with and set in concrete. 
2-4 Hydrants must be rotated so that the pumper connections face the main route of access. 
2-5 All hydrants, public and private, when required, shall be painted in accordance with American Water Works Association specifications. 
(a)  Fire hydrant barrels shall be painted with two (2) coats of Federal Safety yellow above the finished grade or factory coated with electrode position (e-coat) epoxy primer and catalyzed with a two part yellow polyurethane top coating. 
(b)  The hydrants shall be classified in accordance with their rated capacities at 20 psi (1.4 bar) residual pressure or other designated value. The bonnet and nozzle caps shall be painted with two (2) coats of the following capacity-indicating color scheme: 

 
(c)  Surface preparation and field painting shall be in accordance with CCU specifications. 
(3)  Hydrants shall be maintained as necessary by the utility. Fire districts shall be responsible for inspecting hydrants at least annually and for the removal of any vegetation obstructing hydrants. Fire districts shall provide and install blue reflective markers. The markers shall be installed in the roadway to show the location of the hydrant. The fire marshals from any fire district shall file a monthly report with the county water and sewer advisory committee, by the tenth of the month following the end of the previous month. If during any month the fire marshal draws water from any hydrant, he shall so note in his records and shall submit a report to the appropriate utility by the tenth of the month following the end of the month during which the water was drawn. The reports shall include the following applicable data: 
a.  Location of the hydrant; 
b.  The date on which water was drawn from the hydrant; 
c.  The test results, which results shall include static and residual pressures; and 
d.  The actual or estimated amount of water consumed. 
(4)  Section 4-3.3, as shown in Appendix A to Ordinance No. 85-9, shall be amended to read as follows: 
4-3.3. Hydrants shall be set so that the distance from finished grade to the center of the lowest opening will not be less than 18 inches." 
(5)  NFPA Standard 24 shall be amended by the addition thereto of Chapter 9 to read as follows: 
"CHAPTER 9. FIRE HYDRANT SPACING, FIRE FLOWS, DURATION OF FLOW. 
9-1. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following minimum requirements. Distances shall be measured by 'hose lay' as defined in the NFPA text 'Fire Terms' (NFPA No. SPP-60) along the path of vehicular travel. 
9-1.1. Mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions and recreational vehicle parks: Fire hydrants shall be installed as may be necessary so that the distance between hydrants does not exceed 1,000 feet. All hydrants shall be designed to deliver minimum flow of 500 gallons per minute (G.P.M.) at 20 pounds per square inch (P.S.I.) residual pressure for a minimum of one hour. 
9-1.2. Single-family residences, except as defined in 9-1.1, single-family, duplex and triplex family units: Fire hydrants shall be installed as may be necessary so that the distance between hydrants does not exceed 1,000 feet. All hydrants shall be designed to deliver a minimum flow of 750 G.P.M. at 20 pounds P.S.I. residual pressure for a minimum of one hour. 
9-1.3. Industrial, commercial, apartment areas and other high-value areas: Examples, by way of illustration and not limitation, as defined in NFPA Standard 1231, 3-2.4, 3-2.5 and 3-2.6. See Appendix B to Ordinance No. 85-9. Fire hydrants shall be installed as may be necessary so that the distance between hydrants does not exceed 600 feet. The minimum flow from any hydrant shall be such that it is designed to deliver 1250 G.P.M. at 20 pounds P.S.I. residual pressure for a minimum of two hours. 
9-1.4. Heavy manufacturing and heavy industrial areas: Examples, by way of illustration and not limitation, are as defined in NFPA Standard 1231, 3-2.3. Fire hydrants shall be installed so that the distance between hydrants does not exceed 600 feet. Hydrants and flow shall be designed for a minimum flow of 1250 G.P.M. at 20 pounds P.S.I. residual pressure for a minimum of two hours from each of two hydrants at the same time." 
(6)  Sprinkler systems designed and installed in accordance with NFPA Standard 13 may be used to reduce required fire flow as in accordance with the Insurance Services Office Grading Schedule. See Appendix C to Ordinance No. 85-9. 
(7)  NFPA Standard 296 Air Operations for Forest, Brush and Grass Fires 
(8)  NFPA Standard Aircraft Accident/Incident Response Assessment. 
(9)  NFPA Standard 410 Aircraft Maintenance 
(10)  NFPA Standard 403 Aircraft Rescue, Fire Fighting at Airports 
(11)  NFPA Standard 412 Evaluating Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Foam Equipment. 
(12)  NFPA Standard 402Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Operations. 
(13)  NFPA Standard 414 Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Vehicles 
(14)  NFPA Standard 424 Airport/Community Emergency Planning 
(15)  NFPA Standard 1003 Airport Firefighter Professional Qualifications 
(16)  NFPA Standard 1971 Protective Ensembles for Structural Fire Fighting & Proximity Fire Fighting 
(17)  NFPA Standard 1221 Communications Emergency Services 
(18)  NFPA Standard 1901 Automotive Fire Apparatus 
(19)  NFPA Standard 1002 Fire Apparatus Driver/Operator Professional Qualifications 
(20)  NFPA Standard 1410 Training for Initial Emergency Scene Operations 
(21)  NFPA Standard 600 Industrial Fire Brigades 
(22)  NFPA Standard 1931 Fire Department Ground Ladders 
(23)  NFPA Standard 1932 Fire Department Ground Ladders, Use, Maintenance, and Service Testing 
(24)  NFPA Standard 1561 Emergency Services Incident Management System 
(25)  NFPA Standard 1500 Fire Department Occupational Safety and Health Program 
(26)  NFPA Standard 13E Fire Department Operations in Protected Properties by Sprinklers and Standpipe Systems 
(27)  NFPA Standard 1521 Fire Department Safety Officer 
(28)  NFPA Standard 1404 Fire Service Respiratory Protection Training 
(29)  NFPA Standard 1001 Fire Fighter Professional Qualifications 
(30)  NFPA Standard 1961 Fire Hose 
(31)  NFPA Standard 1962 Inspection, Care, Use of Fire Hose, Couplings & Nozzles 
(32)  NFPA Standard 1963 Fire Hose Connections 
(33)  NFPA Standard 1021 Fire Officer Professional Qualifications (34) NFPA Standard 1041 Fire Service Instructor Professional Qualifications 
(35)  NFPA Standard 1983 Life Safety Rope & Equipment for Emergency Services 
(36)  NFPA Standard 472 Competence of Responders to Hazardous Materials/Weapons of Mass Destruction Incidents 
(37)  NFPA Standard 1405 Land-Based Fire Department that Respond to Marine Vessel Fires 
(38)  NFPA Standard 1992 Liquid Splash — Protective Ensembles & Clothing for Hazardous Materials Emergencies 
(39)  NFPA Standard 1403 Live Fire Training Evolutions in Structures 
(40)  NFPA Standard 1981 Open-Circuit Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) for Emergency Services 
(41)  NFPA Standard 1982 Personal Alert Safety Systems (PASS) 
(42)  NFPA Standard 1035 Fire & Life Safety Educator, Public Information Officer & Junior Fire Setter Intervention Specialist Professional Qualification 
(43)  NFPA Standard 1911 In-Service Automotive Apparatus 
(44)  NFPA Standard 1964 Spray Nozzles 
(45)  NFPA Standard 1975 Station/Work Uniforms for Emergency Services 
(46)  NFPA Standard 1401 Fire Protection Training Reports & Records 
(47)  NFPA Standard 1991 Vapor-Protective Ensembles for Hazardous Material Emergencies 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 82-37, § 1, 8-31-82; Ord. No. 82-59, § 1, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 85-9, § 1, 3-5-85; Ord. No. 86-65, § 1, 12-9-86; Ord. No. 91-52, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 11, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-3-5. - Application of code. 
The provisions of the county fire prevention code shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all premises and their occupancies except as otherwise specified by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 9, 7-13-82) 
Sec. 3-3-6. - Fees. 
The board of county commissioners may, by resolution, establish maximum fees for the permits, certificates, approvals and other functions performed under this chapter which shall be payable to the appropriate county department or fire district. Such fees shall accompany each application for such permit, approval, certificate or other fee-related code provision. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 13, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 91-52, § 2, 10-1-91) 
Sec. 3-3-7. - Fire prevention bureau—Created; administration; employees. 
(a)  The board of county commissioners shall delineate policy for the implementation of the Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
(b)  In order to implement the Florida Fire Prevention Code the Board of County Commissioners authorizes the position of "fire marshal" in order to enforce this code throughout the entire unincorporated area of the county as it relates to new construction, and existing occupancies under the direction of the Charlotte Fire/EMS Department in order to enforce this code within the boundaries of Charlotte County. The board of county commissioners hereby refrains from having fire safety inspection responsibilities within the independent fire districts relating to existing occupancies; said responsibilities will be within the jurisdiction of the independent fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 3, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 91-52, § 3, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2010-061, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 12, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-3-8. - Same—Duties. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall have the following duties within the unincorporated areas of the county: 
(1)  Responsibility for the prevention of fires. 
(2)  Responsibility for the oversight of the storage and use of explosives and flammables in new construction. 
(3)  Performing the inspection of installations and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment in new construction. 
(4)  Reviewing the means and adequacy of exits from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose. 
(5)  Performing fire safety and fire prevention inspections. 
(6)  Reviewing plans and specifications prior to the issuance of any permit for construction, erection, alteration, repair or demolition for compliance with the State Minimum Building Codes as provided in F.S. section 553.79 and applicable fire safety standards as provided in F.S. ch. 633. 
(7)  Performing the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(8)  Responsibility for the maintenance of fire cost and loss records. 
(9)  Performing fire safety and fire prevention inspections for existing occupancies. 
(10)  Issuing permits for fireworks displays. Applications for permits shall be made to the appropriate fire marshal on forms provided by the jurisdiction and shall include the applicant's answers in full to inquiries set forth on such forms. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such data and fees as may be required by the jurisdiction. The fire marshal shall review all applications submitted, determine compliance with applicable provisions of the code, and issue permits. If an application for a permit is rejected by the fire marshal, the applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection. A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible at each place of operation, or carried by the permit holder as specified by the fire marshal. All fireworks displays shall be subject to the regulations as outlined in the NFPA Standard 1123 Fireworks Display. 
(b)  The fire marshal and their designees shall have such other powers and shall perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter and codes adopted hereunder and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 4, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 89-9, § 1, 2-7-89; Ord. No. 91-52, § 4, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2010-061, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 13, 6-14-16) 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. Ch. 633; local enforcement of state laws and rules, F.S. § 633.121. 
Sec. 3-3-9. - Inspections. 
(a)  The fire marshal or their designees shall inspect or cause to be inspected all existing premises, other than one- and two-family residences, on a regular basis not to exceed once annually and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings under construction and all buildings in which a change of occupancy or tenancy occurs throughout the entire unincorporated area of the county. In order to assist the fire marshal in identifying buildings to be inspected, the building official is hereby directed to furnish the fire marshal with a notice of all new building permits granted and all requests for a change of electrical service. No certificate of occupancy will be granted for any new or changed tenancy until the fire marshal has made his inspection and certified the premises as acceptable. 
(c)  A firefighter certified pursuant to F.S. section 633.35 may conduct fire safety inspections while on duty as a member of a fire department company conducting in-service fire safety inspections without being certified as a fire safety inspector, if such firefighter has satisfactorily completed an in-service fire department company inspector training program of at least twenty-four (24) hours' duration as provided by rule of the department. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 6, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 91-52, § 5, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2010-061, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 14, 6-14-16) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2. 
State Law reference— Inspections by state personnel, F.S. § 633.081. 
Sec. 3-3-10. - Remedial orders. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal, or any duly authorized inspector, shall find in any building or upon any premises or other places combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire and which are so situated as to endanger life or property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of such premises or buildings to fail to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the order. 
(c)  A copy of any such order shall be delivered to the occupant and owner, if different, of the premises by certified mail, return receipt requested, directed to the occupant at the premises and to the owner, if different, at his address as shown by the latest county tax roll or by personal service complying with the provisions of F.S. Chapter 48. Service by mail shall be complete upon mailing. Personal service may be made by the fire marshal or any authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 82-32 § 7, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 91-52, § 6, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2010-061, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Sec. 3-3-11. - Report of fires. 
Every fire where structural damage has occurred shall be reported in writing to the building department within forty-eight (48) hours after the occurrence of the same by the fire department officer in whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the building department and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, the insurance upon such property and such other information as may be required by the building department. 
(Ord. No. 82-32, § 5, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 91-52, § 7, 10-1-91) 
State Law reference— Investigation of fires by state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.03. 
Sec. 3-3-12. - Unauthorized use of hydrants. 
Unauthorized use of fire hydrants shall be a violation of this chapter and punished as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 85-9, § 2, 3-5-85) 
Sec. 3-3-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3-3-13, requiring an annual report by the fire marshal, derived from Ord. No. 82-32, § 8, adopted July 13, 1982, was repealed by § 8 or Ord. No. 91-52, adopted Oct. 1, 1991. 
Sec. 3-3-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-048, § 4, adopted Oct. 3, 1995, deleted § 3-3-14, board of fire appeals, derived from Ord. No. 82-32, § 12, adopted July 13, 1982; and Ord. No. 91-52, § 9, adopted Oct. 1, 1991. 
Sec. 3-3-15. - Supervision of the firemen's training center. 
The Charlotte County firemen's training center shall be supervised by the office of the county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 89-8, § 1, 2-7-89) 
Sec. 3-3-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-024, § 15, adopted June 14, 2016, repealed § 3-3-16, which pertained to appeals and derived from Ord. No. 95-048, § 5, adopted Oct. 3, 1995. 
Secs. 3-3-17—3-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-34, adopted July 10, 1990, effective July 20, 1990, added §§ 3-3-20—3-3-24 to the Code. The editor has designated these provisions as Art. II, with the existing provisions of the chapter being designated Art. I. Following the existing style of numbering articles in this Code, the editor has renumbered the provisions §§ 3-3-21—3-3-25. 

Sec. 3-3-21. - Authority to provide for construction and installation of fire hydrants. 
The board of county commissioners may provide for the construction and installation of fire hydrants in any area in the county and provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of any such improvement by levying and collection special assessments from the abutting, adjoining, contiguous or other specially benefited property in proportion to the benefits which will be derived from the public works for which provision is made in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-10-90) 
Sec. 3-3-22. - Assessment procedure—Generally. 
Before any improvement is made under this article, the county engineer shall prepare and file with the clerk to the board of county commissioners plans and specifications for the proposed improvement, an estimate of the cost thereof and a tentative assessment roll. Upon the filing of those documents, the board of county commissioners shall hold a public hearing, after publishing notice of such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county one (1) time at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for the hearing. The notice shall, in general terms, describe the proposed improvement, its location, the estimated cost thereof, the amount of such cost that the board contemplates levying and collecting as a special assessment, and a copy of the tentative assessment roll. After the hearing, if the board deems the improvement necessary and advisable and the tentative assessment roll just and proper, it shall adopt a resolution authorizing the improvement to be made, designating the percentage of the total cost of the improvement which is to be levied and collected by special assessment against the specially benefited property, tentatively adopting the assessment roll and providing terms for the repayment of special assessments. The resolution can be considered upon motion of the board of county commissioners or upon the following three (3) conditions having been met: 
(1)  The owners of at least fifty-one (51) percent of such improved, specially benefited property have signed a petition requesting such work. 
(2)  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the property to be assessed has been improved by a dwelling or other building. 
(3)  A petition has been signed by the owners of at least twenty-five (25) percent of all the abutting, adjoining, contiguous or other specially benefited property approving such work. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-10-90) 
Sec. 3-3-23. - Same—Payment. 
After an improvement has been completed under this article and the total cost thereof ascertained, the board of county commissioners shall proceed, after public hearing upon fifteen (15) days' published notice, to adopt the tentative assessment roll or an appropriate amendment thereof as an assessment roll and certify that roll to the clerk to the board of county commissioners. The special assessments shall be due and payable at the office of the clerk and shall draw interest from such date as the board shall provide in the resolution. The rate of interest shall not exceed the legal rate allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-10-90) 
Sec. 3-3-24. - Lien. 
Special assessments levied by the board of county commissioners, as provided for in this article, shall be liens against the property assessed and may be foreclosed against such property by the board of county commissioners in the same manner as mortgages are foreclosed in the state; except that no such special assessment shall be foreclosed against the property unless the same has not been paid as provided in the resolution making such special assessment for a period of one (1) year after delinquency as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-10-90) 
Sec. 3-3-25. - Advancement of funds. 
The board of county commissioners is authorized to receive funds from interested persons to pay all or any part of the cost of any improvement authorized pursuant to the terms of this article, and all such funds paid over to the county shall be expended only for the improvement for which advanced. Agreements between the board and such interested persons may provide for reimbursement of all or any part of such sums from and out of assessments levied and collected against abutting, adjoining, contiguous or other specially improved property. The funds so advanced to the county are declared to be county funds; and in the event of delinquency on the part of any property owner in paying the assessment, the county shall have a lien as for other county funds expended pursuant to this article. The persons advancing such funds shall be entitled to receive interest thereon in the event of collections thereof after delinquency. Such repayments shall be limited to collections from assessments and shall not become a general obligation of the county. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1, 7-10-90) 
Chapter 3-3.5 - IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-28, §§ 1—14, adopted July 1, 1986, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification as Ch. 3-3.5, §§ 3-3.5-1—3-3.5-13, was at the editor's discretion. Resolution No. 87-235, adopted Oct. 6, 1987, on file in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners, provides a guide for the interpretation of development type and computation of impact fees by the zoning official in the implementation of Ordinance No. 86-28, as may be amended. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; finance and taxation, Ch. 1-7; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; planning and development, Ch. 3-5; roads and bridges, Ch. 3-6; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7; zoning, Ch. 3-9; taxing districts, Ch. 4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-3.5-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-3.5-2. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with the county's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  This chapter is intended to be consistent with the dual rational nexus test as established by the Florida Supreme Court and applicable Florida law. 
(c)  This chapter is intended to require new growth and development to contribute its proportionate share of funds needed to provide the infrastructure and public facilities necessary to accommodate any impacts having a rational nexus to the proposed development and for which the need is reasonably attributable to the proposed development. 
(d)  The board of county commissioners finds that the report entitled "Impact Fee Study (Detailed Land use Categories)" dated January, 2021 as set forth herein as Exhibit A prepared for Charlotte County, Florida, by Duncan Associates, hereinafter referred to as the "impact fee technical report" sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for and costs for facilities and improvements in Charlotte County and that the impact fees listed therein have been calculated based on the most recent and localized data. The impact fee schedule recommended in the Impact Fee Technical Report is adopted and is attached as Exhibit A to Ordinance Number 2021-047. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 2, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(2), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 1, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2006-055, § 1, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2009-026, § 1, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 1, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 1, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 3, 3-23-21; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 1, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 2021-047, § 1, 12-14-21) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A, B and C are not set out herein at length but are available for public review in the county offices and on the county's website. 
Sec. 3-3.5-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Adequate security shall consist of a submittal that meets the security requirements for construction of post-recording subdivision improvements as set forth in chapter 3-7 of the Charlotte County Code as amended. 
A transportation capital improvement includes: 
Transportation planning and the right-of-way acquisition, engineering and construction of any project included in the roadway needs list as described in the long range transportation plan as adopted from time to time by the Charlotte County—Punta Gorda Metropolitan Planning Organization; the Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) as adopted by the Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners; or any transportation infrastructure improvements that meet warrants for capacity and safety requirements. 
A component of the impact fee is a specific identified unit or portion of the impact fee identified in the Impact Fee Technical Reports and is identified as roads, parks, libraries, sheriff, administration, fire, and emergency medical services, and which represents the proportionate amount of the total impact fee contributable to uses of land. 
The expansion of the capacity of a road includes any widening, intersection improvement, signalization or other capital improvement designed to increase the road's capacity. 
A feepayer shall mean the property owner, or duly designated agent of the property owner, who is commencing land development activity covered by this chapter. 
The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross floor area for each of a building's stories, measured from the exterior units of the faces of the structure. Floor area does not include floor space used for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Gross leasable area (GLA) is the floor area of a commercial building designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, expressed in square feet as measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Impact fee schedule shall mean the schedule of fees assessed against land development activity or development activity at the rates set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto and incorporated into Ordinance No. 2022-032 and as may be updated pursuant to section 3-3.5-13. 
Land shall have the same meaning as set forth in F.S. § 380.031(7). 
Land development activity or development activity is that activity which requires the issuance of a building permit for a structure that creates an impact. 
Level of service is a qualitative measure used to describe the operational condition of a roadway or intersection. This condition is often denoted through the use of a classification system of "level of service A" through "level of service F." 
A multifamily residence is a building or portion thereof used as a separate dwelling unit and which contains two (2) or more separate dwelling units. 
New lane mile shall mean the continuation of one (1) lane of roadway, one (1) mile in length, which did not exist prior to the improvement's being undertaken. 
Public facilities shall have the same meaning as in F.S. § 163.3164. and includes emergency medical, fire, and law enforcement facilities. 
Road shall have the same meaning as set forth in F.S. § 334.03(22). 
Roads necessary to provide direct access to the development shall refer to capital improvements and right-of-way dedications for any road or intersection improvement whose function at the time of its construction is primarily to allow access to the development. 
A single-family residence is a detached dwelling unit used for single-family residential purposes. 
Site-related improvements are (a) internal, on-site land or facilities required by local regulations, or (b) off-site land improvements necessary to provide safe and adequate service to the development, or (c) collector and arterial roadways that abut or traverse the development unless such roadways are transportation capital improvements. Site-related improvements include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) site driveways and roads; (2) right and left turn lanes leading to those driveways; (3) traffic control measures for those driveways; (4) frontage roads; and (5) roads necessary to provide direct access to the development. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, site-related improvements shall not be considered transportation capital improvements. 
Storage lot is herein considered to be and shall be assessed at the mini-warehouse rate. The fee shall be based on the area for storage of vehicles, materials, or other items being stored, but not for any drive aisles or ancillary infrastructure. 
A traffic impact statement or TIS is a statement meeting the criteria in section 3.3-5-11. 
Trip generation is the amount of traffic a proposed development will have on the roadway network once it is built and has started operating. This amount varies by land uses and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Manual provides the guidelines for the estimation of these trips for various land uses. 
(b)  Rules of construction. 
(1)  For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter. 
a.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
b.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
c.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
d.  The word "feepayer" includes an individual, a person, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(2)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and" or "or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(4)  Where a road right-of-way is used to define district boundaries, it may be considered as part of any district is bounds. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, §§ 9, 11, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 87-42, § 2, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(9), (11), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 2, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 07-014, § 1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 2009-026, §§ 2, 3, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2010-062, § 1, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 2, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 2, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 4, 3-23-21; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 2, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 2021-047, § 2, 12-14-21; Ord. No. 2022-032, § 1, 7-12-22) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A is not set out herein at length but is available for public review in the county offices and on the county's website. 
Sec. 3-3.5-4. - Liberal construction; severability; enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of public health, safety, welfare and convenience. 
(b)  If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(c)  Charlotte County shall have the right to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 12, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(12), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2009-026, § 4, 6-9-09) 
Sec. 3-3.5-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  Any person or governmental body who, after the date of adoption of this chapter, shall commence any new land development activity that requires the issuance of a building permit by Charlotte County or any municipality within Charlotte County, shall be required to pay impact fees in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. All impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall run with the land. 
(b)  Development activity for which building permit applications have been received by the county shall be subject to the impact fee(s) in effect at the time a permit application is received by the county. 
(c)  Any permit application deemed to have become abandoned per Florida Building Code Sec. 105.3.2 Time limitation of application or Florida Building Code Sec. 105.4 Conditions of the Permit, will result in the re-assessment of impact fees under the schedule in place at the time the permit is re-instated or a new permit is obtained. 
(d)  Impact fees shall be collected in the unincorporated area and in the incorporated areas of Charlotte County for land development activity in accordance with this chapter and the Impact Fee Technical Reports, as amended. The county may enter into an interlocal agreement for the collection of impact fees in the incorporated areas of Charlotte County. 
(e)  County impact fees shall be assessed against land development activity within the City of Punta Gorda in the following way and the fee schedule referenced within Section 3-3.5-6 of this ordinance: 

 
(f)  County impact fees shall be assessed against land development activity within the limits of the Englewood Fire District in the following way and the fee schedule referenced within section 3-3.5-6 of this ordinance: 

 
(g)  County impact fees shall be assessed against land development activity within the limits of the Babcock DRI (development of regional impact) in the following way and the fee schedule referenced within section 3-3.5-6. of this ordinance: 

 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 3, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(3), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 97-069, § 1, 8-19-97; Ord. No. 98-031, §§ 1, 2, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 98-031B, § 1, 12-15-98; Ord. No. 99-005, § 1, 2-2-99; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 3, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2009-026, § 5, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2010-062, § 2, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2011-025, § 1, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 3, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 3, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 3-3.5-5.1. - Exceptions and exemptions for existing residential and commercial structures. 
(a)  Impact fees will not be assessed for replacement structures which match the use, occupancy and square footage (if applicable) of the structure being replaced. 
(b)  Vacant commercial structures may be re-used without paying an impact fee, if the proposed use is as intensive, or less intensive than the previous use as identified in the Code of Laws and Ordinances, Charlotte County, Florida. 
(c)  Exemptions from payment of any portion of the impact fees, specifically related to an expansion of an existing nonresidential structure or structures, may be obtained by the feepayer/applicant provided that it can be demonstrated to the county administrator or his designee, following the independent impact analysis technical procedures as stated in section 3-3.5-10 of this chapter, that there will be no net increase in the trip generation to or from the developed site as a result of said expansion in excess of fifty (50) percent of the current trip generation. 
(d)  For buildings constructed prior to the implementation of impact fees in 1986, upon reconstruction, replacement, or re-use, a credit shall be given to the property based upon the use and fee schedule in place at the time of reconstruction, replacement or re-use. 
(Ord. No. 98-031, § 3, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 98-031A, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 07-014, § 2, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-062, § 3, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 4, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 4, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 4, 3-23-21) 
Sec. 3-3.5-6. - Computation of amount of fees. 
(a)  The impact fee schedule is attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived and is calculated at one hundred (100) percent for transportation, community parks, fire/EMS and law/jail; twenty-five (25) percent for public buildings; and zero (0) percent for libraries and regional parks. Starting in [the] year 2023, the rate shall be subject to annual indexing as described in section 3.3.5-13. A copy of the impact fee schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted on the Charlotte County website. 
(b)  At the option of the feepayer, the amount of the fees may be determined by the impact fee schedule, provided the type of land development being commenced is one (1) of those types listed on the impact fee schedule, or, by an independent impact analysis pursuant to section 3-3.5-10 of this chapter. 
(c)  The impact fee technical report provides for impact fees for public buildings, libraries, fire and emergency medical services, law enforcement and correctional facilities, regional, specialty and community parks and transportation. The impact fee schedule indicates the amount to be collected in the unincorporated areas of the county, within the limits of the City of Punta Gorda, within the limits of the Englewood Fire District and within the limits of the Babcock DRI (development of regional impact). 
(d)  If the development includes fractional units, the fee shall be computed to the appropriate fraction. If the development replaces an existing use, the fee that would have been required for the existing use shall be subtracted from the fee otherwise due. 
(e)  If the land development being commenced cannot be classified into a development type identified in the impact fee schedule, the fee payer may, at his option, request that the county administrator or designee perform an administrative determination of land use classification using the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Manual. Upon receipt of a written request for an administrative determination of a land use classification, the county administrator or designee shall determine the most appropriate land use classification using the ITE Manual for the proposed development to which the appropriate impact fee schedule shall be applied. The county administrator or designee may require drawings, plans, or other materials sufficient to make the necessary determination. If the fee payer does not agree with the county administrator's or designee's determination, the fee payer may, at his option, use the most recent edition of the ITE Manual entitled "Trip Generation," and the methodology contained within the impact fee technical reports, to determine the road impact fee component of the impact fee. The fee payer may also determine the amount of impact fees by use of an independent impact analysis pursuant to section 3-3.5-10 of this chapter. 
(f)  If the remaining components of the road impact fee are contested, the fee payer shall address each of the assumptions used in preparing the county impact fee or component thereof, as explained in the impact fee technical reports attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived. The fee payer shall provide substantial competent evidence of assumptions or calculations used in place of those in the impact fee technical reports to compute the fee or component thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 4, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 87-42, § 2, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(4), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 90-7, § 2, 2-6-90; Ord. No. 93-22, § 2, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 94-16, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 98-031, § 4, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 98-031B, § 1(Exh.1), 12-15-98; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 4, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2006-055, § 2, 5-16-06; Ord. No. 2009-026, § 6, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2011-025, § 2, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2012-024, 7-10-12; Ord. No. 2013-019, § 2, 6-25-13; Ord. No. 2014-010, § 2, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 2014-025, § 2, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2015-013, § 2, 4-14-15; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 5, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 5, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 5, 3-23-21; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 3, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 2021-047, § 3, 12-14-21; Ord. No. 2022-032, § 2, 7-12-22) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A is not set out herein at length but is available for public review in the county offices and on the county's website. 
Sec. 3-3.5-7. - Payment of fee and impact fee credits. 
(a)  The impact fee shall be paid to the county administrator or his designee prior to the final building inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy or as otherwise required by Florida law. Impact fees may be paid either in their entirety or in partial payments at any time up to the request for the final building inspection. No such final building inspection shall be made nor any certificate of occupancy be issued until any applicable impact fee has been paid in full. The obligation to pay the impact fee shall run with the land. 
(b)  Any contribution, payment or construction received and accepted by the county for a developer shall be credited against a component of the impact fee if the contribution, payment or construction meets the same needs as a component of the fee established by this chapter or as required by Florida law. This shall include but not be limited to any contribution, payment or construction made pursuant to a development of regional impact development order issued by the county or any additional development requirement. If the feepayer wishes to receive credit against the amount of the impact fee due for such contribution, payment or construction, the feepayer may enter into a written agreement with the county administrator or his designee providing for payment of fees or receipt of credits in the manner and at the time to be specified in the written agreement. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any developer who believes that he is entitled to credit under this subsection on the basis of contribution, payment or construction satisfying the general intent and purpose of this subsection, even though not satisfying every technical requirement and not enjoying a favorable written recommendation of the administrator, may petition the board of county commissioners for relief from the strict terms of this subsection. Petitions shall be in writing and state plainly and briefly why the developer is entitled to credit under the general intent and purpose of this chapter and notwithstanding the failure to satisfy procedural or insignificant elements of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), any recreational vehicle park shall pay the fee prior to issuance of site plan approval unless the developer of the recreational vehicle park and the county administrator or his designee agree to enter into a fee agreement to pay the impact fee at a time later than site plan approval, but in no case later than the issuance of electrical permits for the developer. 
(e)  Credit shall be given only for certain improvements deeded to and accepted by the county meeting the same needs as a component of the fee established by this chapter. 
(f)  Credit may be given for road right-of-way that is deeded to the county and is additional to that which is required on site. The value of the right-of-way shall be determined at the time the right-of-way is accepted by the board of county commissioners. The only right-of-way which will be eligible for credit will be that which is being deeded for use in conjunction with a collector or arterial road. 
(g)  Any road right-of-way or land required to be deeded to the county as a condition of development approval shall be deeded no later than the time at which impact fees are required to be paid under this section unless the county and developer agree to an alternative schedule in writing. The portion of the fee represented by a credit for construction shall be deemed paid when the construction is completed and accepted by the county for maintenance or when adequate security for the completion of the construction has been provided. 
(h)  The value of land dedicated or facilities constructed by a developer and accepted by the county shall be determined, at the option of the feepayer, on the basis of the current county property appraiser's assessment multiplied by a factor of 1.15, or on the basis of an appraisal prepared by an appraiser adhering to the standards for professional practices and code of professional ethics of the Society of Real Estate Appraisers or the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers, or as otherwise required by Florida law. 
(i)  Impact fee credits shall be assignable and transferable pursuant to F.S. § 163.31801, or any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 5, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 87-42, § 2, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(5), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 6, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 6, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, §§ 6, 7, 3-23-21; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 4, 6-22-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-011, § 6, adopted March 23, 2021 amended the title of § 3-3.5-7 from "Payment of fee" to "Payment of fee and impact fee credits," as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-3.5-7.1. - Non-residential economic development incentive deferment program. 
(a)  An owner of a non-residential development which constitutes an economic development project and who has, pursuant to chapter 1-7, article V, economic development incentive program, been accepted as a participant and has entered into a program agreement, as defined in section 1-7-64, may be eligible to defer the payment of assessed impact fees for up to ten (10) years based on the terms of said program agreement. 
(b)  The deferment program shall only inure to the benefit of the original owner, or other parties intended to benefit under the program agreement, and shall be secured by a lien on the property and such additional security as called for in the program agreement. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection 3-3.5-7(a) requiring payment of impact fees prior to the final building inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall not apply to impact fees deferred under this section. 
(d)  An interest rate of five (5) percent annually shall accrue from the time of approval of the program agreement until the deferred fees are paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-062, § 4, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 7, 4-17-15) 
Sec. 3-3.5-7.2. - Non-residential impact fee installment payment program. 
(a)  A feepayer may exercise the privilege of paying non-residential impact fees in installments rather than in a lump sum at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy by entering into the non-residential impact fee installment payment program agreement with Charlotte County (hereinafter the "agreement") required in this section. The county administrator or designee is hereby authorized to prepare and execute the agreement on behalf of the county. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to the feepayer receiving the privilege of paying non-residential impact fees in installments, the county and the feepayer shall enter into the agreement and the feepayer shall pay an initial installment payment of one-third (⅓) of the total impact fee amount owed at the time of approval and execution of the agreement and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The agreement shall provide that, in return for the privilege of paying the non-residential impact fees in installments, the feepayer acknowledges that the subject property is specially benefited by the improvements to the property and the installment payments shall be special assessments levied as non-ad valorem assessments against the subject property pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. For the purposes of this section, the term "Uniform Assessment Collection Act" shall mean F.S. sections 197.3632 and 197.3635, as amended. The agreement shall additionally include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name(s) and address of the feepayer and owner(s), (if different than the feepayer) and the Parcel ID Number of the assessed property; 
(2)  The amount of the annual special assessment and the interest rate to be charged, said interest rate to be five (5) percent annually, which shall begin to run at the time of approval of the agreement. The installment payment term of the agreement shall be for a maximum of four (4) years. In the event a feepayer enters into the agreement after the deadline to place the assessment on the feepayer's upcoming tax bill for that year, the assessment will be placed on the feepayer's tax bill for the following year but shall still accrue interest from the effective date of the agreement. 
(3)  An acknowledgement, agreement, and admission by the feepayer that: 
a.  The applicable impact fee study provides a fair and reasonable allocation between the cost of the impact imposed by the assessed development and the special benefit to the assessed development from having its growth impact mitigated; and 
b.  Waiver of the notice by mail provisions and public hearing requirements contained in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and may include a waiver of any early payment/discount options. 
(d)  Each agreement shall be a covenant that runs with the land and shall be recorded by county in the public records of Charlotte County, Florida, at the expense of the feepayer and shall be signed and notarized by the feepayer and owner (if different than the feepayer). 
(e)  The yearly assessment resolution shall be the resolution for the fiscal year in which an annual assessment is imposed or reimposed hereunder for the purposes of paying the impact fee installment payment. 
(f)  Prior to May 1 of each fiscal year, the feepayer of a parcel assessed hereunder shall have the right to pay the outstanding and unpaid balance(s) owed without a prepayment penalty. 
(g)  Pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, non ad-valorem assessments levied pursuant to this section shall remain liens, coequal with the lien of all state, county, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid. 
(h)  For purposes of this subsection the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  A feepayer must be the legal owner of the property, or designated agent of the owner, and shall provide written and notarized proof of authorization from the owner when requesting to pay impact fees under this subsection; and 
(2)  The feepayer and/or owner must be current on property taxes on the subject property and any other real property owned in Charlotte County by feepayer and/or owner; and 
(3)  The feepayer and/owner cannot be in bankruptcy nor can the property be an asset in any bankruptcy proceeding; and 
(4)  The subject property cannot be in foreclosure and cannot have any federal income tax lien, judgment lien or similar liens encumbering the property. 
(i)  The provisions of subsection 3-3.5-7(a) requiring payment of impact fees prior to the final building inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall not apply to impact fees paid under this section. 
(j)  As an alternative method to the repayment of impact fees by special assessments under this section, the county administrator or designee may elect to lien the feepayer's property to secure repayment of impact fees paid under this section and is authorized to take any necessary action, including the development of any rules, procedures, agreements and forms to effectuate this method. An interest rate of five (5) percent annually shall accrue from the time of approval of the lien agreement until the impact fees are paid. The applicable provisions of section 3-3.5-7.2, as determined by the county administrator or designee, shall apply to impact fees paid under this subparagraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-062, § 4, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2011-025, § 4, 6-28-11) 
Sec. 3-3.5-8. - Refund of fees paid. 
(a)  Any impact fees not expended by the end of the county fiscal year immediately following six (6) years from the date on which the payment of all outstanding impact fees was received by the county shall be returned to the feepayer with interest at the rate of four (4) percent per year. 
(b)  The board of county commissioners may one (1) time by resolution extend for up to three (3) years the date at which the impact fees must be refunded. Such an extension shall be made upon a finding that within the three-year period certain capital improvements are planned to be constructed that will be of direct benefit to the development against which the impact fees were assessed. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 7, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(7), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 93-22, § 3, 5-4-93; Ord. No. 2010-062, § 5, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 2013-001, § 1, 2-12-13) 
Sec. 3-3.5-9. - Use of funds. 
(a)  All funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of infrastructure improvements and transportation capital improvements unless otherwise authorized by Florida law. Impact fees may be designated as they are collected and used for a board-approved capital improvement project against any proportionate and allowable project cost up to the collection amount. The amount of the fees expended for roads, parks or any other particular type of infrastructure improvement shall be in reasonable proportion to the extent to which the need for such type of facility was used as a basis for the fee, as shown in the impact fee technical reports. Impact fee revenues and expenditures shall be accounted for in a separate accounting fund. 
(b)  The county has designated two (2) districts for road impact fees. All road impact fees collected from development south of the Peace River shall be used exclusively for transportation capital improvements located south of the Peace River. All road impact fees collected prior to, and after the effective date of Ordinance number 2022-038 from development located north and west of the Peace River shall be used exclusively for transportation capital improvements within the single combined road district located north and west of the Peace River. The only exception to the aforementioned is that twenty-three (23) percent of all road impact fees are available for use on interdistrict roadways or roadways that would serve to enhance interdistrict transportation, such as U.S. 41. These interdistrict monies may be expended in either road impact fee districts as long as they are expended on an interdistrict roadway or roadways that enhance interdistrict transportation. For purposes of this subsection, any bridge and the approaches thereto, and any water-oriented recreational facility located on a river may be treated as benefiting both sides of such bridge or river and may be funded from development on either or both sides of the bridge or river. This subsection shall not apply to impact fees collected for libraries, regional or specialty parks, law enforcement, EMS or public buildings which may be used anywhere within the unincorporated and incorporated sections of Charlotte County. Impact fees for community parks shall be expended only within the unincorporated section of Charlotte County. Fire/rescue impact fees shall be expended only within the unincorporated section of Charlotte County excluding the Englewood Fire District boundaries. 
(c)  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 6, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(6), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 98-31, § 5, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 5, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2009-026, § 7, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 8, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 5, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 2022-038, § 1, 10-25-22) 
Sec. 3-3.5-10. - Independent impact analysis. 
(a)  At the option of the feepayer, the impact fee or any component thereof may be computed by the use of an independent impact analysis. The feepayer shall be responsible for preparation of a proposed independent impact analysis, and the county administrator or his designee shall accept or reject that analysis. The person who prepares the proposed independent impact analysis shall be approved by the county administrator or his designee on the basis of professional training and experience in the preparation of impact analyses. 
(b)  In the case of the road impact component of the fee being computed by an independent impact analysis, the county administrator or his designee may require traffic impact statement and shall use the road impact component of the fee as shown in the technical report, adjusted as follows: 
(1)  If the county administrator or his designee finds on the basis of generally recognized principles of traffic engineering that the new lane-miles of traffic per unit to be generated by the development is likely to be substantially different than shown in the technical report, the amount of the road impact component of the fee shall be varied in proportion to the extent to which the lane-miles per unit projected for the proposed development varies from the lane-miles per unit shown for the most nearly comparable development. 
(2)  When the feepayer decides to undertake a TIS he shall submit a draft of a traffic impact statement as defined in subsection 3-3.5-1(a) of this chapter to the county administrator or his designee for a determination under subsection (a) of this section. If the statement is prepared in connection with a fee agreement by which terms the fee will be paid at the time of discretionary action by the board of county commissioners, the statement shall be submitted by the county administrator or his designee to the board for its review and at the time it considers the action to be taken. 
(3)  If the traffic impact statement covers less than the entire development, credit shall be given on a pro rata basis for those contributions, payments or construction accepted and received by the county after the effective date of this chapter, pursuant to section 3-3.5-7 of this chapter. 
(c)  In the case of components other than the road impact fee component, the independent impact analysis shall address each of the assumptions used in preparing the county impact fee or component thereof as explained in the impact fee technical report. The independent impact analysis shall provide substantial competent evidence of assumptions or calculations used in place of those in the technical report to compute the fee or component thereof. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 8, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 87-42, § 2, 10-6-87; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(8), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 6, 2-28-06) 
Sec. 3-3.5-11. - Traffic impact statement (TIS). 
(a)  The traffic impact statement shall project to what extent the roads serving or expected to serve the proposed project will meet the level of service requirements of the county's comprehensive plan. The projection shall consider a minimum of a ten-year planning horizon. 
(b)  In determining the effects of a proposed project on the level of service the TIS shall consider the following: 
(1)  Traffic characteristics and levels of service of existing major thoroughfares directly affected by the proposed project; 
(2)  Trip generation and origin-destination projections for the proposed project; 
(3)  Impacts of the proposed project on affected major thoroughfares including anticipated changes in the level of service; 
(4)  Impacts of previously approved projects affecting the same major thoroughfares as the proposed project; 
(5)  Radius of development influence; 
(6)  Effects of phasing of the proposed development, including relationships to any thoroughfare plans and capital improvements program of the county and to the five-year work program of the Florida Department of Transportation; 
(7)  Effects of roadway alterations to be made as part of the proposed project, including intersection improvements, turn lanes, signalization, median and other improvements; 
(8)  Impacts of increased through traffic movement and traffic from potential developments permitted and traffic from potential developments contemplated under the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  The TIS shall address each of the policies of the transportation element of the Charlotte County comprehensive plan. 
(d)  The following methods of evaluation and standards shall be used in preparing the TIS unless the county administrator or his designee finds that, because of circumstances unique to the proposed development and roadway system servicing the proposed development, other methods or standards provide a more accurate means to evaluate the status of the major thoroughfares affected by the proposed project: 
(1)  Total traffic generated by the project shall be computed using the rates published in the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation and Informational Report unless documentation is supplied justifying the use of different rates. Where ITE rates are not available, the feepayer may conduct a count study to determine the actual trip generation rates for similar uses in Charlotte County utilizing the trip generation rate methodology approved by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(2)  Traffic assignments shall be made for each link within the project's radius of development influence in conformance with good traffic engineering principles. Average daily trips shall be based on data for travel during the first quarter of the calendar year. 
(3)  The TIS shall use an analysis of peak-hour intersection capacities to determine whether the standard is met. The analysis shall contain detailed intersection analyses (including calculations) for all intersections within the radius of development influence. Where detailed intersection capacity analysis is provided, the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual shall be referenced and used as documentation. When or if new editions become available, such new editions shall be referenced. 
(4)  The county administrator or his designee may require that both a lane analysis and the intersection analysis be provided if he has reason to believe that at one (1) or more affected intersections the sum of peak-hour critical lane volumes is expected to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) vehicles per hour. 
(5)  The TIS shall cover the radius of development influence of a proposed development, which shall include an area of five (5) road miles from the perimeter of the development, but excluding roads on which traffic assignments from the proposed project do not exceed the following: 

 
The project's radius of development influence shall be measured as road miles from the proposed project, not as a geometric radius. Where the radius of the development influence crosses a county or municipal boundary of an adjoining governmental body, the TIS shall include applicable information from that governmental body, if available, as would be required as if the study were being conducted totally within the boundaries of the unincorporated area of the county. Beyond the five-mile perimeter, all roads must be included which are projected to have five (5) percent of the "Level of Service C" capacity (as defined by the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual) utilized by traffic from the proposed project. 
(6)  Background traffic shall be taken into account as follows: 
a.  The effect of previously approved but incomplete projects that may eventually affect the major thoroughfares within the radius of development influence of the proposed project shall be addressed in the TIS as provided herein. 
b.  Phasing of previously approved projects may be considered in the analysis of background traffic. 
(7)  Future traffic shall be taken into account as follows: 
a.  The effects of increased through traffic and increases in traffic associated with the development of lands suitable for development but not yet planned should be estimated. Estimates should be developed for a period through ten (10) years for through movements and for total buildout of potential developments. 
b.  The then current land use element of the comprehensive plan, in conjunction with the then current zoning regulations, shall be utilized to estimate the traffic impact from potential developments affecting the radius of development influence. 
c.  The estimated projected future traffic of potential development not yet permitted but allowable under the comprehensive plan shall be required for informational purposes, but shall not be used to require the subject development to provide traffic improvements for the planning period through ten (10) years except to the extent of its proportionate fair share. 
(8)  The TIS may take into account roads and road improvements not yet constructed only if all funds for such roads and road improvements have already been specifically appropriated by the board of county commissioners or the legislature of the State of Florida for the particular road or road improvements. 
(9)  The TIS shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer, licensed to practice engineering in the State of Florida, specializing in civil engineering with experience in traffic engineering or any other equivalent combination of experience and training acceptable by the county administrator or his designee. 
(10)  Studies and analyses required by this section shall be subject to review of methodology and technical accuracy by the county administrator or his designee. 
(e)  Independent transportation impact fee assessment. 
(1)  In lieu of the aforementioned traffic impact statement (cannot be combined), an applicant may conduct an independent transportation impact fee assessment study as prescribed below, and based upon the results of that independent study being accepted by the county. 
a.  The county shall determine the amount of the impact fee due, and the applicant shall pay that full amount, the county will hold that money aside until the independent transportation impact fee assessment study process is completed. 
b.  the applicant will then be required to conduct an after study of the existing development for which the independent transportation impact fee assessment study was conducted, after one (1) year which must be submitted to the county within eighteen (18) months from the final certificate of occupancy (C.O.) of the development. For residential developments, the development completed and occupied for at least two (2) years. 
c.  The after study will follow the same methodology as the original independent transportation impact fee assessment study and will assess the actual trip characteristics of the existing development/facility. 
d.  Based upon the results of the after study (that is approved by the county), the applicant will then be required to: 
1.  Pay the additional transportation impact fee, if the actual trip characteristics are more than the independent transportation impact fee assessment study results; or 
2.  Receive transportation impact fee credits pursuant to the impact fee credit portion of this section, if the actual trip characteristics are less than the independent transportation impact fee assessment study results. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 10, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(10), 11-14-89; Ord. No. 2006-018, § 7, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 7, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 8, 3-23-21) 
Sec. 3-3.5-12. - Appeals. 
When any developer, feepayer, or other person is aggrieved by any county order, administrative rule, policy or interpretation under this chapter, he may file his written appeal thereof to the board of county commissioners, after ten (10) days' prior notice to the county administrator. The appeal shall, in a brief, plain statement, contain at least the following: 
(1)  The county action, order, policy or interpretation claimed to be in error. 
(2)  The nature of the error or the reasons why the county action results in error. 
(3)  If the complained county action is in writing, a copy thereof. 
(4)  The order of the board or the relief requested by the person filing the appeal. 
(5)  A certified signed statement that the person filing the appeal has provided a copy of the appeal to the county administrator. 
(Ord. No. 86-28, § 13, 7-1-86; Ord. No. 89-85, § 1(13), 11-14-89) 
Sec. 3-3.5-13. - Automatic update of fee schedule. 
(a)  Until the impact fee rate reaches one hundred (100) percent of the maximum recommended rate, the impact fee schedule may be adjusted annually by the county administrator after consulting with the board of county commissioners in July of each calendar year. Unless otherwise directed by the board of county commissioners, any annual adjustments to the impact fee schedule that result in the impact fees remaining the same or decreasing shall become effective on August 1 of that calendar year. Any annual adjustments to the impact fee schedule that result in the impact fees increasing shall become effective on November 1 of that calendar year, or ninety (90) days after notice of the increase, whichever occurs later. All adjustments to the impact fees shall be based on the methodology described in the technical report. 
(b)  The adjusted fee shall be equal to: 
(1)  The percentage change in the Construction Cost Index, published by McGraw-Hill, between January of the prior year and January of the current year multiplied by 0.667; plus 
(2)  The percentage change in the average just value per parcel for vacant residential land within Charlotte County, as reported by the Charlotte County Property Appraiser, between January of the prior year and January of the current year multiplied by 0.333. 
(c)  The initial index to be referenced is January of the last year when the impact fees were updated with cost or demographic data. 
(d)  If the Construction Cost Index is changed so that the base year is different, the index shall be converted in accordance with the conversion factor published by McGraw-Hill. 
(e)  If the Construction Cost Index is discontinued or revised to make it unusable, the Consumer's Price Index, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or such other index or computation shall be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained if the Construction Cost Index had not been discontinued or revised. 
(f)  The county shall conduct a new impact fee technical study as allowed by Florida law and, when practicable, immediately following any referendums relating to sales tax projects. 
(Ord. No. 2006-018, § 8, 2-28-06; Ord. No. 2011-025, § 3, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2015-014, § 9, 4-17-15; Ord. No. 2019-006, § 8, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2021-011, § 9, 3-23-21; Ord. No. 2021-021, § 6, 6-22-21; Ord. No. 2021-047, § 4, 12-14-21) 
Sec. 3-3.5-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-026, adopted June 9, 2009, provided that the provisions of § 3-3.5-14 shall automatically sunset and be repealed on Sept. 7, 2009. Said section pertained to temporary reduction of impact fees, and derived from Ord. No. 2007-76, § 1, adopted Oct. 23, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-78, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2007; Ord. No. 2009-001, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2009; Ord. No. 2009-021, § 2, adopted May 12, 2009. 
Chapter 3-3.8 - LAND USE AND ENVIRONMENTAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-058, Chs. 1—11, adopted Dec. 19, 1995, enacted provisions pertaining to land use and environmental dispute resolution and provided for codification. Inasmuch as the ordinance did not specify manner of inclusion in the Code, such provisions have been designated as Ch. 3-3.8 by the editor. It should be noted that Res. No. 95-286, adopted Dec. 19, 1995, established standards of conduct for dispute resolution (Exhibit A attached thereto). Such standards are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 

Sec. 3-3.8-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes Charlotte County procedures for the initiation, conduct and conclusion of a special master proceeding under Chapter 95-181, Section 2, Laws of Florida, the Florida Land Use and Environmental Dispute Resolution Act (the act). 
(1)  It is the intent of the county that the special master process be a speedy, inexpensive, and simple method for owners and regulators to settle land use and environmental permitting and enforcement disputes. To that end, owners and regulators should meet face-to-face, in a nonadversarial atmosphere, to resolve disputes without the need for formal representation. 
(2)  Negotiations assisted by a special master will enable an owner and regulators to exert more control over their dispute, allowing the parties to shape a resolution rather than having one imposed. The special master and the parties should exercise maximum flexibility to adapt these procedures to the exigencies of each particular case, consistent with the requirements of state law and due process. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 1, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-2. - Definitions. 
Unless given a different meaning in this chapter or the context indicates to the contrary, words or phrases used in this chapter have a defined meaning as provided for in the act. 
Act means Chapter 95-181, Section 2, Laws of Florida, the Florida Land Use and Environmental Dispute Resolution Act. 
Board means the board of county commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida. 
County means Charlotte County, Florida. 
Development has the meaning given it in section 380.04 F.S. 
Participant means: 
(1)  A person holding title to land contiguous to the owner's property, who has been accepted by the special master as a participant in the proceeding; or 
(2)  A substantially affected person who submitted oral or written testimony, sworn or unsworn, of a substantive nature which stated with particularity support for or objections to the development order or enforcement action in a prior proceeding, including a public hearing, and who has been accepted by the special master as a participant in the proceeding. 
Party or parties shall include the owner, the county and any other governmental entity made a party to the proceeding by the special master upon application of the owner, the county or any other governmental entity. 
Person includes individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations. 
Ripeness decision means an available use decision pursuant to subsection of the act which describes as specifically as possible the use or uses available to the subject real property. 
Special master proceeding means any combination of facilitation sessions, formal or informal hearings, of a public nature authorized under the act. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 2, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-3. - Standards of conduct for parties and participants. 
Standards of conduct for parties and participants may be adopted by the board, by resolution, and shall govern the proceedings unless waived or altered in the special master contract. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 3, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-4. - Pre-initiation meeting. 
Prior to filing a formal request for relief under this chapter, the owner may by letter request an informal meeting with the county administrator to discuss alternatives to the filing of the special master proceeding. The county administrator shall conduct such a meeting as expeditiously as possible and shall include technical staff familiar with the regulations at issue. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 4, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-5. - Request for relief. 
(a)  Filing of request for relief. 
(1)  In order to initiate a special master proceeding an owner, pursuant to subsection (4) of the act or a special master pursuant to section 11 of the act must file two (2) copies of a request for relief in the Office of the County Administrator, 18501 Murdock Circle, Port Charlotte, Florida 33948. The request for relief must be filed within thirty (30) days after receipt of the order or notice of government action. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of receipt of the request for relief, filed pursuant to subsection (4) or (11) of the act, the county administrator or his or her designee shall forward the request to a special master selected pursuant to section 3-3.8-6 below. This time period may be extended by agreement of the parties. 
(b)  Notice of filing. 
(1)  Concurrently with the forwarding of the request for relief to the special master, the county shall serve, by U.S. Mail or hand delivery, a notice of filing the request for relief to: 
a.  Owners of real property contiguous to the applicant's property at the address shown on the latest county taxroll; and 
b.  Any substantially affected person who submitted oral or written testimony of a substantive nature which stated with particularity an objection to or support for any development order or enforcement action at issue. 
(2)  In lieu of providing a complete copy of the request for relief, the notice of filing shall contain any information necessary for the recipient to secure a copy of the request for relief. 
(3)  Any failure to notice potential participants shall be cured by posting of notices of the special master proceeding in a location established by the board for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 5, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-6. - Special master. 
(a)  Special master qualifications and restrictions. The board shall appoint no less than three (3) special masters who shall qualify as such under the act. 
(b)  Special master selection. The county shall include in the request for relief form provided to the owner a pre-approved list of special masters and instructions for objecting to any person named on the list. 
(1)  The parties may mutually agree on a special master. Where the county has been joined by a special master pursuant to subsection (11) of the act, the county shall not unreasonably refuse to abide by the choice of a special master by the original parties. 
(2)  Selection from pre-approved listing. 
a.  The special master may be selected from the lists of approved special masters provided with the request for relief form. Unless a property owner objects to a special master in the property owner's request for relief, those special masters not objected to are deemed acceptable to the property owner. The county will select one of them as the special master to consider the request for relief. 
b.  If the property owner objects to all of the persons on the approved special master list, the county shall be allowed additional time to secure a mutually acceptable special master. 
(3)  If there is no agreement reached among the parties: 
a.  Each party may select one (1) person qualified as a special master who, together, shall select a candidate. If the parties cannot agree on that candidate, the special master shall be selected by the Florida Growth Management Conflict Resolution Consortium from a list of qualified candidates maintained by them for that purpose; or 
b.  The special master shall be selected by the Florida Growth Management Conflict Resolution Consortium from a list of qualified candidates maintained by them for that purpose. 
(c)  In order to promote a nonadversarial special master proceeding, the parties should enter into an agreement with the special master which provides for the following: 
(1)  Agreement by special master that he/she would not be called as an expert witness in any related subsequent or concurrent judicial proceeding. 
(2)  Agreement by parties that special master's recommendation and related materials are inadmissible in any related subsequent or concurrent judicial proceeding except to the extent that a certificate of completion of the process will be available to certify that the special master process has been completed. 
(3)  The special master may not be called to appear before the board or any administrative or judicial tribunal with respect to the written recommendation or any aspect of the proceeding, nor may the special master voluntarily furnish notes or other related material. 
(d)  The special master may require in any agreement that the parties, where not otherwise prohibited by law, provide a deposit of funds to secure payment of the special master's fees and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 6, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-7. - Conduct of the special master proceeding. 
(a)  Request to participate in proceedings. Within twenty-one (21) days after receipt of the request for relief, any candidate for participant status may request from the special master permission to participate in the proceeding. These persons may be permitted to participate in the hearing to the extent allowed under the act. 
(b)  Filing of response. As required under the act, the city administrator or his or her designee shall file a response to the request for relief. 
(c)  Sufficiency hearing; request to be dropped as a party. 
(1)  Prior to any hearing on the merits of the request for relief, the special master may conduct a hearing on whether the request for relief should be dismissed pursuant to subsection (8) of the act. 
(2)  At any time the special master may conduct a hearing on any request to be dropped as a party pursuant to subsection (16)(c) of the act. 
(d)  Notice and timing of special master proceeding. 
(1)  As required under the act, the special master shall, timely convene a special master proceeding on the request. 
(2)  The cost of preparing and filing the initial two (2) copies of the request for relief shall be borne by the property owner. The cost of preparing and serving copies of the request for relief on qualifying participants shall be borne equally by the parties. 
(3)  The cost of preparing and filing of the response to the request for relief shall be borne by the county. 
(4)  The special master's expenses in providing notice shall be borne equally by the parties or as is otherwise established in the special master agreement. 
(5)  Notice to all parties and other persons who have requested such notice shall contain a reference number and date of filing of the request for relief and instructions for obtaining fire information regarding the request for relief. 
(e)  Subpoena powers of the special master. A subpoena issued by a special master may require the witness to bring a document or thing. 
(1)  A party requesting the subpoena of a nonparty witness shall make such request in writing to the special master. 
(2)  The special master shall only subpoena a witness that it believes will aid in the disposition of the matter. 
(3)  Parties subpoenaing witnesses shall be responsible for paying fees and mileage in the amount as provided for under Florida law for witnesses in civil cases. 
(4)  The special master shall provide notice of any witnesses subpoenaed to any party requesting such notice. 
(5)  Service of subpoenas shall be made in the manner provided for by the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(6)  The witnesses of either party that are present for the hearing or are on standby or available on call are not to be excused by either party without the concurrence of the other party or the special master. 
(f)  Conduct of the special master proceeding. The special master proceeding may consist of facilitation sessions, testimony sessions, any combination of those or any form of information gathering and sharing that the special master deems appropriate under the circumstances. With that proviso, what follows is a general outline of a formalized process which is not binding on any party or the special master. 
(1)  Facilitation sessions. 
a.  In all respects, the facilitation discussions shall be informal and open to the public. The discussions shall operate at the direction and under the supervision of the special master. The object of the facilitation sessions is to focus attention on the impact of the governmental action giving rise to the request and to explore alternatives for relief that are consistent with the public interests. 
b.  As alternatives, if variances, and other types of adjustments to the development order or enforcement action are raised, the special master shall afford participants a reasonable opportunity to address the impacts of such alternatives on their substantial interests. 
c.  Any time after commencement of the presentation of evidence in the hearing, the special master may recess the hearing and presentation of evidence to recommence a facilitation session. 
(2)  Procedures for hearing and presentation of evidence. The hearing shall be conducted under the direction and supervision of the special master. The special master shall decide all questions of procedure limited only by the need to afford reasonable due process. The special master shall determine the order of presentation of issues and information unless otherwise set forth in the special master agreement. It is the duty of the special master to proceed with all reasonable diligence. 
(g)  Offer to compromise. At any time during the special master proceeding a party may submit an offer of compromise. 
(h)  Settlement. 
(1)  At any time during the special master proceeding, the owner and the county may enter into a settlement agreement or other agreement as to the permissible use of the owner's land. 
(2)  A settlement agreement or other agreement as to the permissible use of the owner's land may be executed by the property owner or the party representative with authority to recommend a settlement directly to the board, subject to approval by the board. Any settlement agreement containing such a condition shall not be binding on any party until approved by all parties, including the board. 
a.  Forms of relief available. 
1.  Relief may include, but is not limited to, exemptions or variances from the applicable ordinances, including the land development regulations. 
2.  Relief may be conditional in nature. Such conditional relief must be analyzed to determine if the conditions under which it is granted are consistent with the purpose and intent of the subject regulations and the applicable comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Conditions may be initial, after satisfaction of which the settlement is implemented, or conditions may be ongoing, the failure of which serve to vacate the settlement and to divest the owner or his/her successors in interest of any rights thereunder. 
(b)  Any relief granted shall address the appropriateness of relief, allowing the county to fashion that form of relief necessary to equitably address the legitimate concerns of the property owner while at the same time protecting the legitimate interests of the citizens of the county. Such decisions shall be guided by the criteria established in the act. 
(3)  Where such settlement or other agreement has been entered into, the special master shall not thereafter render a recommendation on those matters covered by the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 7, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-8. - Special master recommendation. 
The special master shall prepare a recommendation as provided by law. The special master shall send a copy of the recommendation in each case as required by law. The county administrator shall notify the state department of legal affairs as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 8, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-9. - Response to special master's recommendation. 
The board, in consultation with other governmental entities participating in the proceeding, must respond to the special master's recommendation as provided for under the act. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 9, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-10. - Ripeness decision. 
If the board accepts the special master's recommendation or modifies it and the owner rejects the acceptance or modification, or if the county rejects the special master's recommendation, the county must issue a ripeness decision. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 10, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 3-3.8-11. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Time requirements and furnishing copies. 
(1)  Any copy which must be furnished to the special master, a party or a participant may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, or by hand delivery to the recipient's last known address. A copy furnished by mail will be deemed furnished to the recipient upon being deposited in the mail. 
(2)  Any document which must be submitted, or any copy which must be furnished to the special master, a party or a participant, may be submitted or furnished by facsimile transmission. Documents submitted and copies furnished by facsimile transmission will be deemed submitted or furnished to the recipient on the date transmitted as shown on the recipient's copy, if the copy is complete. 
(3)  All documents must plainly identify the parties or participants to whom copies have been furnished. 
(4)  The parties may adopt ground rules regarding computation of time in a special master agreement. 
(5)  Any document received after 5:00 p.m. shall be filed as of 8:00 a.m. on the next regular business day. 
(b)  Consolidation. 
(1)  If there are separate matters which involve similar issues or identical parties, the special master may consolidate the matters, if the parties agree and it appears that consolidation would promote the speedy, efficient, and inexpensive resolution of the matters. If the separate matters are pending before different special masters, the parties may decide which special master will conduct the consolidated proceeding. 
(2)  In the event that the parties agree to consolidate related special master proceedings into one (1) proceeding, the parties must jointly agree to selection of a special master. The special masters involved should maintain an open and professional relationship with each other, and each has an obligation to inform the others regarding the consolidation. 
(Ord. No. 95-058, Ch. 11, 12-19-95) 
Chapter 3-5 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; boats, docks and waterways, Ch. 3-1; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; fire prevention code, Ch. 3-3; impact fees, Ch. 3-3.5; mobile homes, Ch. 3-4; roads and bridges, Ch. 3-6; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7; water and sewers, Ch. 3-8; zoning, Ch. 3-9; Charlotte County/Punta Gorda Comprehensive Plan, Ch. 3-10. 
State Law reference— Power of county to prepare and enforce comprehensive plans for development of county, F.S. § 125.01(1)(g); power to establish, coordinate and enforce zoning regulations, F.S. § 125.01(1)(h); county planning and land development regulation, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3202 et seq.; conflict of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act with other statutes, F.S. § 163.3211; intent of such act, F.S. § 163.3161. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-5-1. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or to fail to comply with, the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 3-5-2. - Local planning agency. 
The planning and zoning board is designated as the local planning agency for the unincorporated area of the county in conformity with the provisions of F.S. section 163.3174. 
(Ord. No. 82-04, § 1, 2-9-82; Ord. No. 86-02, § 1, 2-4-86; Ord. No. 89-92, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 90-36, § 1, 8-7-90) 
Cross reference— Community development director or designee designated as secretary to the local planning agency, § 3-10-3. 
Sec. 3-5-3. - Public participation in the planning process; procedures for preparation, adoption of and amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Charlotte County shall utilize a citizens advisory committee and such county personnel as are designated by the county administrator in the preparation of the county comprehensive plan. Such county personnel as are designated by the county administrator for this purpose shall assist and advise the county planning department in the preparation of the comprehensive plan. The membership of the citizens advisory committee shall, if possible, be a representative collection of individuals from the following interests: agriculture, environment, homeowners, academia, general public, development, and industry. The membership of the citizens advisory committee shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners after recommendation of individuals for proposed membership by the county administrator. The deliberations and recommendations of these representatives, along with a representative of the local planning agency, shall be presumed to represent general community values on issues related to planning Charlotte County's future. All meetings of the citizens advisory committee or any subcommittees that it may deem appropriate to form shall be open to the public. 
(b)  The county shall advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in Charlotte County pursuant to the requirements of F.S. section 163.3184(15). 
(c)  The above-described notice shall include a statement that written comments shall be accepted and included as a part of the public record by the county planning department pursuant to F.S. section 163.3184(7). 
(d)  Public hearings shall be held pursuant to F.S. section 163.3184(15). 
(e)  Prior to public hearings, the county shall make available draft copies of the plan or plan amendment(s) in public libraries. 
(f)  The planning department and such other county personnel as are designated by the county administrator shall, in conjunction with the citizens advisory committee, coordinate an annual review of the comprehensive plan and prepare an implementation report. This report shall be completed by April 1 of each year, with the first such report due April 1, 1990. This report will identify programs and projects identified for completion with the current fiscal year and the status of each program or project. The report shall include, at a minimum, the following components: 
(1)  A comparison of the comprehensive plan objectives against actual results will be determined through monitoring and evaluation systems to be developed and implemented by 1990) procedures for monitoring and for evaluation of the plan). These systems will be designed to specifically report on all facilities and services for which the comprehensive plan established either an acceptable level of service or a desired level of service. Such a report will identify all new impacts on the facilities and services and the effects/trends as it relates to the established LOSs; and whether improvements or enhancements are planned or programmed for those with deficit trends. 
(2)  An evaluation shall be prepared regarding the extent to which unanticipated and unforeseen circumstances impacted effective implementation of the comprehensive plan and occurred between the date of adoption and date of the report. 
(3)  A review of the capital improvements element shall be incorporated as part of the annual implementation report. This review shall be based upon the operational procedures to be developed and implemented by 1989 and the conditions for the review, as established within the capital improvements element under Objective 4. The review shall be completed by an administrative advisory group composed of existing county staff designated by the county administrator which shall include, among other county personnel, the county budget officer. 
(4)  Justifications shall be prepared for situations where projects or programs were not completed as scheduled by the comprehensive plan. Programs which have not been implemented within the scheduled fiscal year should be considered for inclusion within the annual budget for the upcoming year. 
The annual comprehensive plan implementation report shall be presented to the local planning agency for review within ninety (90) days after the completion of the report. In a public hearing, the local planning agency shall review this report and make recommendations to the board of county commissioners for amendments to the comprehensive plan, as necessary. The board of county commissioners shall hold a public hearing to consider the recommendations of the local planning agency and accept public comment. If comprehensive plan amendments are deemed necessary, such amendments will be incorporated into a bi-annual comprehensive plan amendment process. 
(g)  Pursuant to the requirements of F.S. section 163.3191, Charlotte County shall prepare periodic reports, at least once every five (5) years, which assess the effectiveness of the comprehensive plan. The following components shall be included as a part of the five-year evaluation and appraisal report: 
(1)  An assessment of the major problems of development, physical deterioration, and the location of land uses and the social and economic effects of such uses in the area; 
(2)  An evaluation of the status of each element in the comprehensive plan at the time of adoption and at the date of the report; 
(3)  A comparison of the comprehensive plan objectives against the actual results at the date of the report; 
(4)  An evaluation of the extent to which unanticipated and unforeseen circumstances, which impact the effectiveness of the comprehensive plan, occurred between the date of adoption and the date of the report. 
In order to provide a comprehensive review of the plan, the citizens advisory committee and such county personnel as are designated by the county administrator shall participate in the preparation of the evaluation and appraisal report and the previous annual reports may be utilized in the preparation of this report. The evaluation and appraisal report shall be reviewed by the local planning agency in a public hearing and recommendations regarding the report will be forwarded to the board of county commissioners. The county commission shall consider the recommendations of the local planning agency in a public hearing and determine the necessary amendments to be made to the comprehensive plan as a part of the bi-annual plan amendment process. 
(Res. No. 88-276, §§ 6—12, 12-13-88) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of §§ 6—12 of nonamendatory Resolution No. 88-276, adopted Dec. 13, 1988, § 3-5-3 was at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— 1988 Charlotte County/Punta Gorda Comprehensive Plan, § 3-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 3-5-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-114, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1997, repealed § 3-5-4, planned unit development and condominiums, derived from the Minutes of Dec. 3, 1968, Art. V. 
Secs. 3-5-5—3-5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-5-16. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of provisions of this act [this article] may be punished as misdemeanors. 
(b)  Violation of any of the regulations, restrictions, limitations and orders promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this act [this article] may be restrained by injunction, including mandatory injunction, and otherwise abated in any manner provided by law, and any such suit or action may be instituted and maintained by any taxpayer in Charlotte County, by any person adversely affected by the violation of any such regulation, restriction or limitation, by the planning and zoning board, by the board of appeals or by the board of county commissioners. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, §§ 17, 21) 
Sec. 3-5-17. - Acts ratified. 
Zoning regulations and all other official acts taken by the Charlotte County Planning and Zoning Board pursuant to the provisions of Laws of Fla., Chapter 61-1983, are ratified and approved and shall remain in full force and effect insofar as the same shall not be repealed or revoked by the provisions of this act [this article]. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 22) 
Sec. 3-5-18. - Regulations authorized. 
The board of county commissioners of Charlotte County, in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare, is authorized and directed to adopt zoning regulations, to regulate subdivision of lands, to reserve streets for future public acquisition and to regulate building in the land reserved for such streets; and to provide for and adopt a comprehensive plan for the future growth and development of Charlotte County. The powers and authority herein granted to the said board of county commissioners shall be exercised in the manner hereinafter [in this article] provided. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-19. - Planning and zoning board—Generally. 
The board of county commissioners shall by resolution create and appoint the Charlotte County Planning and Zoning Board and shall appoint as members thereof one (1) qualified voter from each of the county commissioners' districts of said county; provided, however, that no member of said planning and zoning board shall be an elected county official: 
(1)  Members of the planning and zoning board shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, but they may be removed by majority vote of the board of county commissioners. Present members of the planning and zoning board shall serve until the end of their respective terms, and thereafter the first appointments pursuant to this act [this article] shall be for terms of four (4) years in odd-numbered county commission districts and for initial terms of two (2) years from even-numbered county commission districts. Thereafter all appointments shall be for four (4) years; provided, the board of county commissioners shall fill vacancies by appointment for the unexpired term or terms. 
(2)  The planning and zoning board shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among the members of the board, and the board may create such other offices as shall be deemed necessary or proper. The chairman, secretary and other officers of the planning and zoning board shall serve for one (1) year, but shall be eligible to be reelected. The board of county commissioners shall adopt rules of procedure for the transaction of business by said planning and zoning board. Said planning and zoning board shall maintain a record of all transactions, and the same shall be a public record. 
(3)  The planning and zoning board shall have a chief administrative officer who shall be appointed and whose compensation shall be fixed by the board of county commissioners. In addition to the chief administrative officer, there shall be such inspectors and other employees of the planning and zoning department as shall be recommended by the planning and zoning board and approved by the board of county commissioners, which board of county commissioners shall likewise fix the salaries of the chief administrative officer and all other employees. The compensation of the chief administrative officer and all other employees shall be paid from the county general fund. 
(4)  Members of the planning and zoning board shall receive no salaries or other compensation for their services as such members, but they shall be entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(5)  The board of county commissioners is authorized and empowered to provide in its annual budget sufficient funds for the operation of said planning and zoning board, and to pay all such budgeted funds for such purpose from and out of the general fund of said county. The board of county commissioners is further authorized, empowered and directed by resolution to fix reasonable recording, hearing and permit fees to be charged by the planning and zoning board, all such recording, hearing and permit fees to be deposited in the general fund of said county. The planning and zoning board is also authorized to receive and expend any and all sums which may be received as gifts, state or federal grants, and state or federal loans for the purposes and activities authorized by this act [this article]; provided, however, that acceptance of loans shall be subject to approval of the board of county commissioners. The board of county commissioners may appropriate from the general fund of Charlotte County such sums as shall be necessary to defray the reasonable expenses of administering the provisions of this act [this article] during the remainder of the current fiscal year. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 2; Ord. No. 77-8, § 1, 6-14-77) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2. 
Sec. 3-5-20. - Same—General powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning board shall have the power and duty[:] 
(a)  To acquire and maintain such basic information and material as shall be necessary for an understanding and evaluation of past trends, present conditions and probable future developments and trends within Charlotte County. Such information and materials may include maps and photographs of the county, statistics with respect to population, property values, economic base, land use and such other data as shall be deemed important in predicting and determining the amount, direction and type of future development in Charlotte County. 
(b)  To prepare and, from time to time, to amend and revise a comprehensive and coordinated general plan for meeting present requirements and future anticipated needs for the orderly development of Charlotte County. 
(c)  To establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area. 
(d)  To prepare and recommend to the board of county commissioners resolutions providing for the orderly development of the county in conformity to the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  To determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the future growth, improvement and development of the county. 
(f)  To keep the board of county commissioners and the general public informed with respect to the comprehensive plan and all plans and programs developed for the county. 
(g)  To conduct such public hearings as may be deemed necessary to enable the planning and zoning board to draft, establish and maintain a comprehensive plan for the growth and development of the county. Such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, studies of housing, commercial and industrial conditions and facilities, parks, playgrounds, and other recreational facilities, public and private utilities, traffic, transportation and parking problems. 
(h)  To request and receive from all public officials all records or information which shall be required by the planning and zoning board in the performance of its functions. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 3) 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning board designated local planning agency, § 3-5-2. 
Sec. 3-5-21. - Comprehensive plan—Generally. 
[(a)] The planning and zoning board shall, utilizing basic information theretofore assembled, prepare a comprehensive plan for the physical growth and development of Charlotte County, the said plan to be based on existing and anticipated needs, reflecting existing and proposed development, and stating the principles which should guide future development. The comprehensive plan may also include a projected financial program for future public improvement. 
(a)[(b)] The comprehensive plan shall be adopted by the planning and zoning board after public hearing, which public hearing shall be preceded by publication of notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in Charlotte County, such notice to be published one (1) time not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such public hearing. Upon adoption of the said comprehensive plan by the planning and zoning board, the same shall be thereupon submitted to the board of county commissioners, which board shall approve and adopt said plan in whole or in part, or reject the same, in which event the action of the board of county commissioners shall be certified to the planning and zoning board shall thereupon revise and amend the plan and again submit the same to the board of county commissioners for final action. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 4) 
State Law reference— Power of county to prepare and enforce comprehensive plans for development of county, F.S. § 125.01(1)(g). 
Sec. 3-5-22. - Same—Effect. 
After final adoption of a comprehensive plan for Charlotte County or for any substantial geographical area of the county, no street, road or other public way, and no park, public building or structure shall be created, constructed, altered or authorized until the same shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning board. The planning and zoning board shall act promptly on such matters and shall immediately certify the results of its investigation, including recommendation for approval or rejection, to the board of county commissioners. The board of county commissioners may thereupon adopt or reject the recommendation of the planning and zoning board with respect to such matters. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 5) 
Sec. 3-5-23. - Same—Revision. 
The planning and zoning board shall, not less than once each year, revise and review the comprehensive plan as hereinabove [in this article] defined and shall recommend such changes therein or amendments thereto as shall appear desirable in the light of conditions within the county as they shall then exist. Such action shall likewise be taken by the planning and zoning board upon request from the board of county commissioners. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 6) 
Cross reference— Procedures for filing amendments to the comprehensive plan, § 3-5-27. 
Sec. 3-5-24. - Surveys; plats. 
[(a)] The board of county commissioners may direct the planning and zoning board to make or cause to be made surveys to locate the lines of a street or streets for which future provision is made in the comprehensive plan for the county. The board of county commissioners may direct the planning and zoning board to make a plat of the territory thus surveyed showing the lands which it recommends shall be reserved for future acquisition as public roads and streets. Before finally approving such plats the planning and zoning board shall conduct a public hearing which shall have been advertised one (1) time not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of said hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county. Upon final adoption of such plat the planning and zoning board shall transmit the same to the board of county commissioners together with its estimate of the time or times within which the lands shown on such plat as street locations should be acquired by the county. Such plat may thereupon be adopted or rejected by the board of county commissioners after consideration and upon amendment, if amendment shall be deemed by said board to be necessary. Upon approval and adoption of such plat by the board of county commissioners, together with an estimate of the time within which such streets and roads shall be created, the same shall be recorded among the public records of Charlotte County. Such street and road locations may be altered from time to time as conditions change, but such alterations shall be adopted in the same manner as the original plat shall have been adopted. 
(a)[(b)] No plat subdividing lands in Charlotte County into lots shall be approved and admitted to record by the board of county commissioners until the same shall have been submitted for examination to the planning and zoning board, and its recommendation has been received. It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning board to examine all such plats and to require that the same shall conform to the comprehensive plan theretofore adopted for the future development of the area affected by such proposed plat. If the planning and zoning board shall disapprove a proposed plat, the grounds for disapproval shall be spread upon the minutes of the said board, and the person filing such plat shall likewise be notified. Approval of a proposed subdivision plat by the planning and zoning board shall not constitute an acceptance of dedication of any street or other public area depicted upon such plat. The planning and zoning board shall be governed by the provisions of law governing the platting of lands in Charlotte County and by the regulations adopted by the board of county commissioners pursuant to such laws. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 18) 
Sec. 3-5-25. - Buildings. 
After street and road locations have been reserved as hereinbefore [in this article] provided, no building permit shall thereafter be issued for construction or alteration of any building in the bed of any such street or road, nor shall any building be erected therein except upon special approval by the planning and zoning board, which board shall not unreasonably withhold permission when it shall appear that a hardship will result from a failure by the planning and zoning board so to act. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 19) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2. 
Sec. 3-5-26. - Adoption by municipalities. 
Any municipality in Charlotte County may adopt the provisions of this act [this article] and subject itself to the regulations adopted pursuant hereto and may provide for the administration of zoning and planning within such municipality by the Charlotte County Planning and Zoning Board, the Charlotte County Board of Zoning Appeals and by the administrative officials of said county appointed hereunder. The adoption hereof by a municipality shall be by ordinance, which shall take effect only after the terms and conditions thereof shall have been approved by resolution adopted by the board of county commissioners. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 20) 
Sec. 3-5-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-005, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2018, repealed § 3-5-27, which pertained to procedures for filing amendments to the comprehensive plan and derived from Res. No. 86-1, §§ 1—11, adopted Jan. 7, 1986; Res. No. 86-152, § 2, adopted July 29, 1986; Ord. No. 87-17, §§ 3—5, adopted May 19, 1987; and Ord. No. 91-50, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 1, 1991. 
Sec. 3-5-28. - Fees to accompany comprehensive plan amendment requests. 
The board of county commissioners shall, by resolution, fix reasonable recording, hearing, and permit fees to be charged for any requests to amend the comprehensive plan; and the fee shall be made payable to the board of county commissioners and filed with the planning department at the time of the application for amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
(Res. No. 85-328, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 90-50, § 1, 9-25-90) 
Editor's note— Res. No. 85-328, adopted Dec. 17, 1985, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification as § 3-5-28 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 3-5-29. - Reserved. 
Secs. 3-5-30—3-5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AS TO ZONING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 3-9. 

Sec. 3-5-41. - Regulations—Generally. 
For the purpose of accomplishing coordinated and harmonious development of Charlotte County so as to provide for existing and anticipated future needs, and in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the county, the board of county commissioners shall adopt a resolution or resolutions creating zoning regulations for all of Charlotte County outside the limits of any municipality. The county commission shall divide the county into zoning areas or districts of such number, shape and size as may be deemed best suited to effect the purposes of this act [this article], and the county commission shall provide for the zoning regulations in each of said districts, which regulations shall[:] 
(a)  Provide for regulation of height, number of stories, size, location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings and other structures for trade, industry, residence and other purposes. 
(b)  Provide for the use of land and water for trade, industry, residence and other purposes. 
(c)  Provide for size of yards; courts and other open spaces. 
(d)  Provide for [the] percentage of lot or parcel of ground that may be occupied by buildings or other structures. 
(e)  Provide for preventing overcrowding of land and water and for preventing the undue concentration of population. 
(f)  Provide reasonable schedules for the amortization of nonconforming uses and structures. 
(g)  Provide for such other regulations as shall be within the public interest and shall promote the health, morals and public welfare. 
All regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be uniform throughout each district, but the regulations applicable to one (1) district may differ from those in other districts. The said regulations shall provide for the locating of trades, callings, industries, commercial enterprises, residences or other buildings designed for specific uses in any district, and the said regulations may specify that certain uses may be excluded or subjected to reasonable requirements or special regulations. All such regulations in the several districts which shall be created hereunder shall be so designed as to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, and shall be adopted with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the general character of the district and its special suitability for particular uses, and shall be designed to conserve the value of lands and buildings and to encourage the most appropriate use of lands throughout the county. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 7) 
Sec. 3-5-42. - Same—Adoption. 
Preliminary recommendations providing for the boundaries of zoning areas or districts and the regulations and restrictions to be enforced in each shall be prepared by the planning and zoning board on its own motion or at the request of the board of county commissioners. The said preliminary recommendations shall include [a] draft of proposed zoning regulations, together with zoning maps and other explanatory material, and shall be submitted upon completion to the board of county commissioners. The board of county commissioners shall consider such preliminary report and shall return the same together with the approval of said board or its recommendation with respect thereto, to the planning and zoning board. There upon, the planning and zoning board shall prepare a final draft of zoning regulations and return the same to the board of county commissioners for final approval. The board of county commissioners shall, after notice published one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation published in Charlotte County, the said publication to be not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the said meeting, hold and conduct a public hearing upon the said proposed final zoning regulations. The board of county commissioners, after such public hearing, shall adopt final zoning regulations for the county; and it shall have the right to amend the proposed final regulations prior to the adoption thereof. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 8) 
Editor's note— There is only one paragraph in the above section. 
Sec. 3-5-43. - Same—Amendment. 
The board of county commissioners may from time to time amend the zoning regulations and zoning districts adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by this act [this article]. Amendments and alterations in the said regulations and district boundaries may be proposed by the board of county commissioners, by the planning and zoning board, or by petition of the owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the lands to be affected by the proposed amendment of regulations. When the proposed change or amendment is considered on the petition of land owners, as herein provided, the petitioners may be required to assume the cost of legal advertising and other expenses incidental to hearing and adoption of amended regulations. When such amendments are proposed, the planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing with fifteen (15) days prior public notice as hereinbefore provided in other cases, and the planning and zoning board shall submit its recommendation to the board of county commissioners who shall likewise hold public hearing or hearings thereon prior to acting upon the said recommendation, and such public hearing shall be preceded by notice published one (1) time not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the said hearing. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 9) 
Sec. 3-5-44. - Board of appeals—Generally. 
(a)  As a part of the zoning organization, the board of county commissioners shall create a board of zoning appeals. The said board of zoning appeals shall have five (5) members, one (1) of whom shall be appointed from each of the five (5) county commissioners' districts of Charlotte County, and members of said board shall be appointed by the board of county commissioners. No member of the board of zoning appeals shall be an elected official of Charlotte County, but not less than one (1) nor more than two (2) members of the board of zoning appeals shall be a member or members of the planning and zoning board. The manner of appointment and removal and the terms of office of members of the board of zoning appeals shall be the same as herein [in this article] provided for members of the planning and zoning board. The removal of a member of the board of zoning appeals shall be on the same terms and conditions as are hereinbefore provided for members of the planning and zoning board. Vacancies shall be filled in like manner as vacancies on the planning and zoning board. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals shall elect from its membership a chairman and secretary, who shall serve for a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible to succeed themselves. The board of county commissioners shall adopt rules for the transaction of the business of the board of zoning appeals, which board shall maintain a record of all its resolutions, transactions and decisions on all matters, and the same shall constitute a public record. 
(c)  The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its meetings, showing the vote of each member on each question, indicating, also, the absence or failure or a member to vote. The results of all of the official actions of said board shall become a public record in the office of the said board. 
(d)  The costs and expenses of operation of the board of zoning appeals shall be budgeted and paid in the same manner as is hereinbefore [in this article] provided for the planning and zoning board, and shall be a part of the budget adopted for such board. 
(e)  The board of county commissioners is authorized, empowered and directed to establish a schedule of reasonable fees to be charged by the board of zoning appeals, and all such sums received shall be deposited in the general fund of Charlotte County. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 10) 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2. 
Sec. 3-5-45. - Same—Functions generally. 
The board of zoning appeals is granted the following powers and shall perform the following functions: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals where it is asserted there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning regulation adopted pursuant to this act [this article]. 
(b)  To permit, authorize and grant special exceptions to zoning regulations, subject to reasonable safeguards, in particular circumstances. 
(c)  To authorize, upon petition, such variances from the terms of the zoning regulations as shall not be contrary to the public interest where, in specific cases, owing to special circumstances, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the regulations will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(d)  The board of zoning appeals shall not issue or grant variances or special exceptions which will permit a land use in a zone or district in which such use is forbidden by the zoning regulations. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 11) 
Sec. 3-5-46. - Same—Modification of administrative acts. 
The board of zoning appeals may, upon proper petition and after reasonable notice and hearing, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of any zoning regulation adopted pursuant to this act [this article] and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as shall be proper in the circumstances, and for such purpose shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal shall have been taken. Any decision reversing the ruling of such administrative official shall have the concurring vote of three (3) members of the board of zoning appeals. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 12) 
Sec. 3-5-47. - Grounds of appeal; transmission of papers. 
Any appeal from any requirement, decision, determination or order of any administrative official charged with the enforcement of any zoning regulation adopted pursuant to this act [this article] shall be taken to the board of zoning appeals, and the appeal shall specify the ground upon which the same shall have been taken and shall be filed within such reasonable period of time and in such form as shall be prescribed by the board of zoning appeals by rule applicable to all appeals. The administrative official from whom the appeal is taken shall, upon being notified of the filing of the appeal, forthwith transmit to the board of zoning appeals all documents, plans and other papers constituting the record of the action from which the appeal is taken. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 13) 
Sec. 3-5-48. - Stay of proceedings and work. 
When an appeal from any decision of an administrative official has been taken and filed with the board of zoning appeals, all proceedings and all work on the premises concerning which the decision was made shall be stayed unless the official from whom the appeal was taken shall certify to the board of zoning appeals that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings or work shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of zoning appeals or by the circuit court if the same shall have theretofore been refused by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 14) 
Sec. 3-5-49. - Hearing of appeal; costs. 
The board of zoning appeals shall fix the time for the hearing of an appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be published one (1) time not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in Charlotte County, Florida. All costs involved in the conduct of appeals may be assessed to the appellant in the discretion of the board of zoning appeals and subject to regulations by the board of county commissioners. At the hearing of an appeal any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 15) 
Sec. 3-5-50. - Appeal to county commission or circuit court. 
[(a)] Any person or persons, corporation or other entity aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals may, within thirty (30) days after such decision shall have become final, but not thereafter, apply to the circuit court of the county for appropriate relief. There shall be no right to apply to the circuit court for relief on account of any order, requirement, decision, determination or action of any administrative official unless there shall first have been an appeal therefrom to the board of zoning appeals. It is the intention of the legislature that all administrative steps provided in this act [this article] with regard to appeal and review shall be taken before any application may be made to the courts for relief with respect to matters or things appealable and reviewable hereunder, and that relief through the courts shall be had only from decisions, regulations, restrictions and orders of the board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  [(b)] All of the powers, duties and obligations conferred upon the board of zoning appeals in section 10 [section 3-5-44] through section 16 [this section] hereof, insofar as applicable, may be assumed by the board of county commissioners as an ex officio board of zoning appeals. The board of county commissioners may constitute itself as such board of zoning appeals by adopting a resolution to that effect, and when acting in such capacity its secretary shall be the clerk of circuit court. At any time after electing to be the board of zoning appeals the board of county commissioners may by appropriate resolution invoke the provisions of section 10 [section 3-5-44] through section 16 [this section] hereof and shall thereupon appoint a board of zoning appeals as provided in section 10 [section 3-5-44] (a) of this act [this article]. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 63-1209, § 16) 
Secs. 3-5-51—3-5-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; roads and bridges, Ch. 

Sec. 3-5-66. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article:] 
The word "plat," whenever used as a noun in the context hereof, shall be deemed to mean a map depicting the division or subdivision of lands into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts or other portions thereof, however the same may be designated. 
Whenever the verb "to plat," in whatever tense used, is employed in the context hereof, the same shall mean to divide or subdivide land into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts or other portions thereof, however the same may be designated. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 3-5-67. - Violations. 
Any sale of or offer to sell or contract to sell any lot, block, parcel, tract or other portion of land, however designated, within the purview or this act [this article], unless the provisions of this act [this article] shall first have been complied with, shall constitute a misdemeanor, and the person, firm or corporation found guilty thereof shall be punished as provided by law. Each separate sale, offer to sell and contract to sell shall constitute a separate offense. The tax assessor [property appraiser] shall inform the county prosecuting attorney of any violation or probable violation which shall be apparent from the records of the tax assessor [property appraiser]. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 10) 
Sec. 3-5-68. - Recorded in public records. 
Whenever land in Charlotte County, Florida, is platted into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts or other portions, however designated, a plat thereof shall be recorded in the public records of Charlotte County, Florida. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 3) 
Sec. 3-5-69. - Prerequisites to approval by county. 
The board of county commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida, is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, as prerequisites to the approval for record of any plat or plats of lands lying outside municipal limits, the width and location of roads, streets, alleys, thorough-fares and ditches and setbacks therefrom; to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions and purposes of this act [this article]; to prescribe specifications and requirements for and regulations relating to construction of roads, streets, alleys, drainage facilities, minimum lot sizes, maximum block sizes, building lines, names of streets and roads, and bridge construction; to require streets, roads and alleys shown on such plat or plats to be paved with proper drainage, according to specifications of the board; provided, however, that specifications and requirements relating to construction of roads shall not exceed the specifications and requirements of the state road department [department of transportation] of the State of Florida for the construction of secondary roads in this county. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 4) 
Sec. 3-5-70. - Approval before recording. 
No plat of platted lands in Charlotte County, Florida, lying outside the municipal limits of any incorporated municipality shall be recorded either as an independent instrument or by attachment to another instrument entitled to record, unless and until it shall first be approved by the board of county commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida, and if such lands lie within any municipal limits, by the governing body of such municipality. Such approval shall be by resolution or resolutions of the board of county commissioners and by the governing body of such municipality. Provided, however, that a plat of a tract or parcel of land may be attached to the deed of conveyance thereof as a means of particularizing the description of the land conveyed, and such attached plat shall be entitled to record as a part of the deed of conveyance. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 5) 
Sec. 3-5-71. - Information provided. 
No plat of lands in Charlotte County, Florida, shall be recorded hereafter unless it shall show the following: 
(1)  The approval of the board of county commissioners and the county attorney and, if the lands lie within municipal limits, the approval of the governing body of such municipality. 
(2)  The width of roads, streets, alleys and other rights-of-way, however designated, shown thereon. 
(3)  The grades of all roads, streets, alleys and other rights-of-way, however designated, and the elevations of the several portions of the land depicted on the plat, by contour lines or otherwise; provided, however, that the same may be shown on a separate instrument which by reference on the plat shall be made a part of such plat; provided further that the requirements hereof may be waived by the board of county commissioners or the governing body of the municipality, as the case may be, by an express provision in the resolution approving such plat. 
(4)  Extensions and continuations along the same courses, whenever feasible, of primary roads and streets, however designated, which when projected would cross the platted lands. 
(5)  A dedication to the public by the owners of the lands involved, of all roads, streets, alleys, easements and other rights-of-way, however designated, shown on such plat, for perpetual use for public road and street purposes and other purposes incidental thereto. The effect of such dedication shall be to vest in the public body having control and jurisdiction of such roads, streets, alleys, easements and other rights-of-way, and its successors, full, complete and exclusive possession and control of the same and of all trees, shrubbery and other plantings and installation therein for the full width thereof as shown on such plat. It is specifically provided, however, that such owner or owners may reserve unto themselves, their heirs, successors and assigns, the reversion or reversions thereof whenever such roads, streets, alleys, easements and other rights-of-way should be discontinued by law. 
(6)  A dedication by the mortgagee, judgement creditor or other encumbrancer, if any, subordinating such mortgage, judgement or other encumbrance to the rights of the public in and to all streets, roads, easements, parks and other public ways depicted on said plat. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-72. - Lands subject to flooding. 
No plat of lands subject to flooding lying outside of the limits of an incorporated city or town shall be approved except in those cases where such protective restrictions as may be required by the board of county commissioners are provided and referred to on the plat. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 7) 
Sec. 3-5-73. - Payment of taxes. 
Before any plat shall be recorded, all taxes on the land shall be paid, and all tax sales certificates against the land shall be redeemed, before said plat shall be entitled to record by the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 8) 
Cross reference— Finance and taxation, Ch. 1-7. 
Sec. 3-5-74. - Fees. 
The board of county commissioners shall, by resolution, fix reasonable recording, hearing and permit fees to be charged upon application for the approval of any plat or plats of lands lying outside municipal limits. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 9; Ord. No. 90-50, § 2, 9-25-90) 
Sec. 3-5-75. - Roads; streets; drainage. 
No plat shall be accepted for record until all roads, streets and drainage facilities shown thereon shall have been installed in accordance with specifications which shall have been adopted by the board of county commissioners; provided, however, that a play may be accepted for record prior to the installation of roads, streets and drainage facilities if the said plat is accompanied by a good and sufficient surety bond payable to the county. The said bond shall be in an amount not less than the estimated cost of improvements provided for in the plat and in any separate instruments which may be required to be filed with the said plat and shall be subject to acceptance and approval by the board of county commissioners. The bond shall be conditioned on full and satisfactory completion of said improvements in accordance with the specifications and standards established by law, or by regulation or resolution of the board of county commissioners. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1986, § 11) 
Cross reference— Street, drainage and lighting districts, Ch. 4-6. 
Secs. 3-5-76—3-5-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CLEARING, FILLING AND SOIL CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, adopted July 21, 1998, deleted former art. IV, §§ 3-5-91—3-5-98, permit to fill subdivision lot, derived from Ord. No. 85-39, adopted Oct. 29, 1985, and enacted a new art IV, §§ 3-5-91—3-5-98, herein set forth. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7. 

Sec. 3-5-91. - Applicability. 
Except where specifically exempt herein, the requirements of this article shall apply to all land clearing and land filling activities conducted within the unincorporated area of Charlotte County. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to engage in any land clearing or filling activities, except those undertaken as part of a bona fide agricultural operation, prior to the issuance of either a Charlotte County building permit, excavation permit, or tree removal authorization. 
All land clearing and land filling activities authorized under this article must comply with the standards provided in sections 3-5-95 through 3-5-97. 
The issuance of a Charlotte County building permit, excavation permit, or tree removal authorization does not exempt applicants from having to fulfill the permitting requirements of other jurisdictional agencies including, but not limited to, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission, or the applicable water management district. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-92. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be ascribed a meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this article its most reasonable application. 
Comprehensive plan shall mean the County Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to the requirements of F.S. Ch. 163. 
Critical area stabilization shall mean the stabilization of exposed soil in highly erodible or critically eroding areas. 
Denuded shall mean stripped of vegetation and other natural cover, thereby increasing susceptibility to soil erosion. 
Development or development activity shall mean: 
(1)  Clearing, scraping or removing the vegetation from a site; or 
(2)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavation, leveling, grading, digging, borrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soils of a site. 
Development site shall mean any site upon which development activities take place. 
Erosion shall mean the weathering away of soil by wind and water. 
Perennial shall mean the persisting from year to year and not prone to seasonal die back. 
Sediment barrier shall mean a physical barrier through which water readily passes and that functions to trap or prevent the passage of sediments suspended within the transmitted water. 
Topsoil shall mean those soils classified as the upper part of the soil which are the most favorable material for plant growth, ordinarily rich in organic matter, and are used to top dress roads, lawns, and land affected by mining or development. 
Watercourse shall mean any natural or artificial stream, creek, channel, ditch, canal, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows. 
Wetland shall mean any area that is inundated by surface or groundwater with a frequency sufficient to support and under normal circumstances does or would support a prevalence of vegetative species that require a saturated or seasonally saturated soil condition for growth and reproduction, e.g., swamps, sloughs, marshes, wet prairies, bayheads, grass beds, mud flats and ponds. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-93. - Procedure. 
At the time of application for a building permit, the applicant shall provide: 
(1)  A survey of the subject property, signed and sealed by a professional surveyor registered in the State of Florida, which meets the minimum technical standards as provided by chapter 61G17-6, Florida Administrative Code. 
(2)  A plot plan, signed and sealed by a professional engineer or surveyor registered in the State of Florida, which illustrates grading sufficient to demonstrate that the property, when developed, will drain to an approved drainage facility without interfering with the proper drainage of surrounding properties. Drainage may be towards a canal, drainage green belt, or other established drainage facility. Lots may not drain to a rear lot easement which is not maintained by the county unless approved by the county stormwater utility director and land development supervisor or their designees. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-94. - Standards. 
(a)  Slopes may not exceed four to one (4:1) (horizontal to vertical) except that slopes permitted by the county health department shall be allowed for septic system installation in the area of the septic system and in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
(b)  Where an adjoining property has a structure at a lower elevation than the proposed structure and the existing slope on the adjoining property is sloping downward from the proposed structure, a swale must be provided entirely on the subject property in order to ensure that drainage occurs across the subject property without interference to drainage of the adjoining parcel. 
(c)  During construction, the existing front and side swales must not be filled or obstructed in any way, and the adjacent property's drainage must be maintained. Except at the high point for drainage, the installation of a temporary pipe shall be required in the county right-of-way to maintain drainage during clearing and fill operation and throughout construction. Temporary pipe must remain in place until permanent pipe (if any) is placed. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-95. - Erosion control at development sites. 
(a)  Water quality. All drainage leaving cleared development sites shall be filtered by sediment barriers. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain the effectiveness of filtration by regular clearing of captured sediments or by refurbishment, as necessary. Captured sediments are to be disposed of on upland portions of the development site. 
(b)  Prevention of wetland degradation. Staked and entrenched hay bales, or other temporary sediment barriers shall be installed at the toe of all exposed slopes which meet or exceed four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) and are within twenty-five (25) feet of wetlands, waters of the state, or any surface water feature not bounded entirely by the limits of the development site. These shall be placed and maintained such that drainage will not overflow or bypass the barrier and shall remain in place until the slope is leveled or permanently stabilized. 
(c)  Dust control. All development of one (1) acre or greater which will result in exposure of denuded soil during the months of November through March shall employ dust control procedures consistent with the guidelines of the Natural Resource Conservation Service or the FDEP Florida Development Manual. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-96. - Critical area stabilization. 
(a)  Intent. This section is intended to ensure that highly erodible or critically eroding areas including, but not limited to, dams, dikes, levees, cuts, ditches and other artificial watercourses, fills, spoil piles and denuded gullied sites, are stabilized to conserve topsoil and prevent sedimentation of surface waters. 
(b)  Temporary soil stabilization. All graded or cleared areas greater than one (1) acre which will be subject to erosion by wind or water for a period of twelve (12) months or greater prior to the establishment of finished grade, agricultural crops, or permanent perennial vegetative cover shall be stabilized. 
(c)  Fill slopes. All slopes of four horizontal to one vertical (4:1) or greater shall be sodded or otherwise stabilized in accordance with guidelines of the natural resource conservation service. In the event that the slope is a temporary result of earthmoving activities associated with development of a site and said slope will be modified within thirty (30) days, stabilization shall not be required. This shall not preclude compliance with the remaining provisions of this article. 
(d)  Swales and other drainage systems. All swales and other manmade, nonstructural drainage conveyances excavated after the effective date of these regulations shall be stabilized with perennial grass cover; application may be through sodding, hydroseeding, or other methods which achieve stabilization and are approved by the stormwater utility director or his designee. In the event that the bottom of the conveyance is below seasonal high groundwater levels, grass cover shall be required to extend down to the seasonal high groundwater line only. In no instance shall the preceding be construed to supersede the requirements of the Charlotte County Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
(e)  Exemptions. Unpaved roads and other surfaces designed for vehicular circulation shall be exempt from the requirements of section 3-5-96(b). 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-97. - Conservation of native topsoils. 
(a)  Intent. This section is intended to preserve native topsoils, where present, and to the greatest extent practicable. 
(b)  Retention on-site. To the extent practicable, the topsoil which occurs on a site prior to development shall be retained or stockpiled throughout the development of the site such that it will not be buried during the placement of fill. Following fill placement and prior to landscaping, stockpiled topsoils shall be redistributed over the exposed, filled portions of the site. In no event shall the preceding be interpreted to require grade change within the dripline of trees to be preserved, nor the stockpiling of topsoils from any portion of the site which will not be filled. 
(c)  Exemptions. Any development site which is identified by the natural resource conservation service as devoid of native topsoils shall be exempt from the requirements of section 3-5-97(b). 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Sec. 3-5-98. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article will be by the community development department as designated by the county administrator. 
(b)  After the issuance of the authorizations referenced in section 3-5-91 hereinabove, it shall be unlawful for the permittee to do any clearing [or] filling except in accordance with the terms and conditions of such authorizations. At the time o the final building inspection, the inspector shall determine if the site is graded in substantial conformance with the currently approved grading plan on file with the building department. Conformance with the approved plan shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Any changes to the approved grading plan must receive prior approval of the building official, which approval shall be made administratively. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions and requirements of these regulations shall be a civil violation within the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board with a maximum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day. 
(d)  Alternatively, a violation of these regulations may be prosecuted pursuant to F.S. section 125.69. Each incident of violation will be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-054, § 1, 7-21-98) 
Secs. 3-5-99—3-5-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER; FLOODPLAIN; WETLANDS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 18 of Ord. No. 89-37, adopted May 31, 1989, repealed §§ 3-5-111—3-5-116, 3-5-131—3-5-137. These sections were derived from Ord. Nos. 82-35, §§ 2—11; 82-40, § 1, 83-25, §§ 1—7, 87-23, § 1, and Res. No. 84-191, §§ 1—4. Sections 5—17 of Ord. No. 89-37 have been included as §§ 3-5-111—3-5-123. Subsequently, § 3 of Ord. No. 90-50, adopted Sept. 25, 1990, effective Oct. 4, 1990, amended a nonexistent § 3-5-137 to read as follows: 
"The Board of County Commissioners shall, by resolution, fix reasonable recording, hearing and permit fees to be charged for review of stormwater system plans." 
Cross reference— Roads and bridges, Ch. 3-6; sewer and water districts, Ch. 4-5; areas of special and shallow flooding hazard under zoning ordinance, § 3-9-67. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-5-111. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Attenuation: Reduction of stormwater flow rate from developed intensity to predeveloped intensity. 
County engineer: The person so designated by the board of county commissioners and his duly authorized designees. 
Detention: The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent controlled discharge. 
Developer: Any person who engages in development or development activity either in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property. 
Development: The construction or installation of a structure or impervious surface, or the alteration of a drainage facility. 
Discharge or discharge point: The point of outflow of water from a project site. 
Engineer of record: A professional engineer registered in Florida, who is competent in the fields of hydrology and stormwater management control. The engineer of record is also any other professional engineer designated by the original engineer as his representative or, if the original engineer is unavailable, designated by the owner/applicant. 
Erosion: The weathering away of soil by the action of wind or water. 
Existing: The average condition prior to any physical alteration of the site related to proposed development. 
Flood: A temporary rise in the level of any water body or watercourse, which results in the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Groundwater: Water beneath the surface of the ground. 
Impervious surface: A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. The term includes water bodies, streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, and similar structures. 
Maintenance: That action taken to restore or preserve the functional intent of any facility or system. 
Natural systems: Systems which predominately consist of or use those communities of plants and animals which naturally occur on the land, in the soil or in the water. 
Owner: The person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion, or title of property. This term may also include a tenant if, under his lease, he is responsible for the maintenance of the property. 
Percolation: Downward flow or infiltration of water through the pores or spaces of rock or soil. 
Permeability: The ease with which air, water or other fluids can move through soil or rock. 
Person: Any individual, governmental agency or entity. 
Retention: The collection and storage of runoff without subsequent surface discharge. 
Sediment: Solid material that is in suspension or has settled. 
Sedimentation facility: Any structure or area which is designed to hold runoff water until suspended sediments have settled. 
Site: Any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one (1) ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project. 
Stormwater facility: The whole or any part of the stormwater system. 
Stormwater system: The system used for the management and conveyance of stormwater to the discharge point. 
Structure: Anything constructed, erected, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. 
Swale: A natural or manmade drainage conveyance feature, which has a top width to depth ration equal to or greater than 8:1 or side slopes equal to or greater than four (4) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical. 
Treated stormwater discharge: That runoff which has been managed in accordance with Chapter 17-25, Florida Administrative Code, as delegated to the water management districts. 
Vegetation: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses, and grasses. 
Water: Any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground. It includes the water in any watercourse, water body, or drainage system. It also includes diffused surface water and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as coastal waters. 
Water body: Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily contains water and which has a discernable shoreline. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial stream, creek, channel, ditch, canal, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction which has a definite channel, bed or banks. 
Wetland: An area consisting of plant species and soil types using vegetative index rule as defined in Chapter 17-4.022, Florida Administrative Code, by the Warren Henderson Wetlands Act and exceeds one-half acre. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 5, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-112. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any development not specifically exempted by section 3-5-113. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 6, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-113. - Exemptions. 
Exempt from this article are the following: 
(1)  One (1) residential structure, on an individual site, used for housing. 
(2)  One (1) duplex structure, on an individual site, used for housing. 
(3)  One (1) triplex structure, on an individual site, used for housing. 
(4)  Storage buildings, sheds, swimming pools, and other accessory structures constructed on (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(5)  Model home used for model home or single-family housing. Additional temporary parking spaces may be installed provided a bond is posted and a letter of intent given to ensure removal when model home usage changes. 
(6)  Fences. 
(7)  Any proposal for a development activity causing insignificant impact upon the stormwater facility, as determined by the county engineer. 
(8)  Agricultural-related activities which cause insignificant hydrological impacts, as determined by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 7, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-114. - Special cases. 
(a)  Any development located within a subdivision or other area that has a county-approved master stormwater system is only subject to review for compliance with parameters of the approved master stormwater management plan. 
(b)  For projects less than ten (10) acres in size or having less than two (2) acres of impervious area, the design criteria shall be in accordance with section 3-5-116. 
(c)  As an alternative to review of a stormwater plan by the county engineer, the applicant may submit an approved surface water management permit from either SWFWMD (Chapters 40D-4 and 40D-40, F.A.C.) or SFWMD (Chapters 40E-4 and 40E-40, F.A.C.); and the plans and conditions of that permit will be issued as a permit under this article subject to compliance and enforcement of this article. This alternative does not allow the applicant to commence a regulated activity without approval of the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 8, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-115. - Stormwater plan. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in any development activity prior to obtaining approval of a stormwater plan by the county engineer in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 9, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-116. - Minimum design standards for stormwater plans. 
(a)  The design for the stormwater management facility shall be consistent with the requirements of the SWFWMD and furthermore shall include hydrologic analysis acceptable to the county engineer. Design of control structures shall be based on a 25-year 24-hour event. Design of facilities upstream of control structures shall be designed in accordance with a 5-year, 24-hour event. 
(b)  All stormwater calculations, reports and plans shall be signed and sealed by a Florida registered professional engineer. 
(c)  Stormwater pond slopes above actual water surface and swales shall be stabilized. 
(d)  Temporary detention of stormwater runoff in parking lots shall not exceed nine (9) inches in depth. 
(e)  Construction of private stormwater storage facilities are prohibited in public rights-of-way and/or easements. 
(f)  Artificial watercourses shall be designed considering soil type to prevent erosion. 
(g)  Stormwater outfalls should discharge into a county-approved drainage system. Whenever the discharge structure/outfall pipe does not abut a county/state or similar facility, the applicant shall submit documentation demonstrating legal rights to convey discharge across private property. 
(h)  Use of grading contour lines are encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 10, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-117. - Performance standards for stormwater plan. 
To ensure attainment of the objectives of this article and that performance standards will be met, the design, construction and maintenance of stormwater systems shall be consistent with at least the following standards: 
(1)  Channeling untreated runoff directly into off-site water bodies is prohibited. 
(2)  Discharge of runoff from detention ponds shall not exceed the calculated predevelopment rate, or rate determined by a basin study, whichever is less, as determined by the county engineer. 
(3)  The banks of detention and retention areas shall be stabilized and maintained to the approved design. 
(4)  Vegetated areas shall be created, or where practicable, retained in their natural state along the banks of all watercourses, water bodies or wetlands. The width of these areas shall be sufficient to prevent erosion, trap the sediment or overload runoff, provide access to the water body, and allow for periodic flooding without damage to structures. 
(5)  Intermittent watercourses such as swales and ditches shall be vegetated. 
(6)  The use of the stormwater facilities and vegetated buffer zones as open space, recreation and conservation areas shall be encouraged; and wetlands, lakes and other natural water bodies shall not be used as primary sediment traps. 
(7)  Those areas which are not to be disturbed shall be protected by an adequate barrier from construction activity. Whenever possible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(8)  Control of erosion by sedimentation facilities shall be established prior to development and receive regular maintenance to ensure that they continue to function properly. 
(9)  Disturbed areas shall be revegetated, stabilized and protected from erosion as soon as possible. 
(10)  Design to resist saltwater intrusion by adhering to applicable best management practices. 
(11)  Stormwater facilities are required to be maintained to design parameters. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 11, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-118. - Contents of the stormwater plan. 
All stormwater plans must be signed and sealed by a Florida professional engineer. These plans will present, at the minimum: 
(1)  The existing hydrological conditions of the site and of receiving water shall be described where appropriate, including the following: 
a.  The direction, flow rate, and volume of flow of surface water runoff under predevelopment conditions. 
b.  The location of areas on the site where surface waters collect. 
c.  A description of all watercourses, wetlands and water bodies on or adjacent to the site. 
d.  Groundwater levels, including seasonal fluctuations, using U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS) methodology or other appropriate means. (Give elevations based on National Geodetic Vertical Data (NGVD) wherever possible.) 
e.  A map and description of the 100-year floodplain. 
f.  Plans shall be at a scale acceptable to the county engineer. 
g.  Elevations in floodplains shall be NGVD. 
h.  A current boundary description is required as prepared by a professional land surveyor. 
i.  A site plan is required showing any easements of records. 
j.  The engineer of record shall provide a soil percolation rate and an estimated wet season groundwater elevation and shall describe the methodology used, determining each, which shall be consistent with the application submittal. 
k.  Provide a topographic survey which is needed to accommodate review of stormwater management facilities. 
l.  Dimensions used in stormwater computation shall be shown on plans. 
m.  Other information and data may be required by the county engineer. 
(2)  All components of the stormwater system and measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water and control structures shall be described where appropriate, including: 
a.  The channel, direction, flow rate and volume of surface water that will be conveyed from the site, with a comparison of predevelopment conditions. 
b.  Detention and retention areas, including plans for discharge of contained water. 
c.  A plan for the control of erosion and sedimentation which specifies the type and location of control measures, the stage of development at which they will be put into place or used, and provisions for the maintenance of them. 
d.  Any other information which the engineer of record and the county engineer consider necessary for an evaluation of a proposed development. 
(3)  The county engineer, after reviewing the stormwater plan, may require additional information to evaluate the plan on its impact on water resources and/or maintenance of the stormwater system. 
(4)  Certificate of substantial compliance with the plan signed and sealed by a professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 12, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-119. - Permit application review. 
(a)  All applications for stormwater approval shall be filed in the office of the county engineer, which office shall note thereon the date of filing. If the county engineer determines that the stormwater plan complies with this article, the engineer shall approve the stormwater plan by noting on the face of the stormwater plan his approval, the date of his approval, and his signature. If, however, the county engineer determines that the stormwater plan does not comply with this article, he shall note on the face of the stormwater plan the reasons therefor, the date of such determination, and his signature. 
(b)  The county engineer shall act on the application within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of filing. Except, however, if the county engineer requests more information from the applicant, the thirty (30) calendar days shall not begin to run until such date as the information is received from the applicant by the county engineer. 
(c)  Approval required. Except for development activity on any single-family lot associated with the allowed use of the lot, it shall be unlawful to engage in any development (activity) specified in section 3-5-112 or present a plat for recording prior to obtaining approval of a stormwater construction plan by the county engineer in accordance with the provisions of this article with appropriate regulations and fees. 
(d)  After the county engineer shall have determined whether or not the proposed stormwater plan complies with this article, he shall provide due written notice to the applicant that he intends to issue or deny the stormwater permit. The decision of the county engineer will become final unless a notice of appeal to the board of county commissioners is filed within fifteen (15) days after entry of the notice of intent and receipt thereof by the applicant. 
(e)  If stormwater approval is not obtained within one (1) year of initial submission, or extension requested by the engineer of record, the applicant must initiate a new application. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 13, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-120. - Appeal. 
The applicant may appeal the decision of the county engineer. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the county engineer promptly shall provide notice of the date, time and place of the hearing before the board of county commissioners. Notice will be published at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing, and the hearing will be held within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 14, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-121. - Variance. 
(a)  Any owner, agent, lessee or occupant of land may apply in writing to the board of county commissioners for a variance from the requirements or restrictions of this article. Applications shall be submitted through the county engineer, stating the specific grounds and the relief requested. 
(b)  The board of county commissioners may grant variances from the terms of this article which will not significantly impair attainment of the objectives of the article. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 15, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-122. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the county engineering department to monitor those stormwater management controls specified within this article. A stop-work order may be issued by the county engineer when determined that a sufficient violation has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 16, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-123. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be punishable as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 89-37, § 17, 5-31-89) 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-1-8. 
Secs. 3-5-124—3-5-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3-5-131. - Title. 
The title of this division shall be the "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § A, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-132. - Facts and purpose. 
(a)  Facts. The recitals included in Ordinance No. 2008-001 are hereby incorporated by reference and adopted as findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens Charlotte County, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (Chapter 62-624 F.A.C. pursuant to the authority of F.S. section 403.0885) by reducing pollutants in discharges and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-133. - Jurisdiction. 
This division shall apply to and be effective in the unincorporated area of Charlotte County. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 2, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-134. - Definitions. 
Authorized connection shall mean a physical point source to the county's MS4 which is authorized by the county. 
Authorized discharge shall mean any direct or indirect discharge to the county's MS4, or regulated waters that is composed entirely of stormwater, that is exempt as specified in section 3-5-135 or that is authorized by Charlotte County. 
Best Management Practices or BMPs shall mean a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in the environment. Best management practices include but are not limited to: stormwater treatment facilities; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage, leaks, waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures; and, any such provisions as the county determines appropriate and necessary for the control of pollutants. 
Clean Water Act (CWA) shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Commercial activities shall mean facilities and/or activities, which include but may not be limited to, any office, manufacturing, distribution, or warehousing operation, including all ancillary activities, as an entity that accommodates the direct or indirect exchange of goods or services. 
Construction activities shall mean any activity which results in the modification of surface features, including but not limited to grading, land clearing, or the placement or alteration of buildings, structures or utilities, unless specifically exempted by this or any other applicable Charlotte County ordinance. Hand clearing as necessary for land surveying shall not constitute construction. 
County shall mean the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County, Florida. 
County administrator shall mean the county administrator of Charlotte County, Florida or designee. 
Discharge shall mean, but is not limited to, any release, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping, of any substance or material. 
Illicit connection shall mean a physical point source to the county's MS4 which is not authorized by the county. Any connection in violation of a NPDES or MSGP permit or failure to notify the county administrator of a connection to the county's MS4 prior to discharging constitutes an illicit connection. 
Illicit discharge shall mean any direct or indirect discharge to the county's MS4, or regulated waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater or which is not authorized by the county. Any discharge in violation of a NPDES or MSGP permit or failure to notify the county administrator of a discharge to the county's MS4 prior to discharging constitutes an illicit discharge. 
Industrial activities shall mean facilities and/or activities, which include but may not be limited to, any manufacturing, distribution, or warehousing operation, including all ancillary activities, as an entity that accommodates the direct or indirect exchange of goods or services. 
Land development regulations shall have the same meaning as the same term in F.S. section 163.3164, as amended, and the regulations per Part III Land Development and Growth Management of the Code of Laws and Ordinances Charlotte County, Florida, as amended. 
Multi-sector generic permit (MSGP) shall mean the multi-sector generic permit for stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity pursuant to provisions of F.S. section 403.0885, and applicable rules of the Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.) and pursuant to the department's federally-approved National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater regulatory program. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by a local government that discharges to waters of the United States or connects to other MS4s, that is designed solely for connecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 or any amendment thereto. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permits shall mean general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to sections 307, 402, 318, or 405 of the Clean Water Act, and pursuant to provisions of F.S. section 403.087, and applicable rules of the Florida Administrative Code. 
Owner shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land, as appears by deed of record, agreement for deed, or properly executed contract for purchase. 
Person shall mean any individual, corporation, firm, company, joint venture, partnership, sole proprietorship, association, or any other business entity, any state or political subdivision thereof, any municipality, and interstate body and any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States and any officer, agent, or employee thereof, and any organized group of Persons whether incorporated or not. 
Pollutant shall have the same meaning as pollution as defined in F.S. chapter 403. 
Regulated waters shall mean Waters of the United States as defined in 40 CFR § 122, as amended, and waters of the state as defined in F.S. chapter 403, as amended, that lie within Charlotte County. 
Shall, may: The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
State shall mean the State of Florida. 
Stormwater shall mean any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rainstorm events. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 3, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-135. - Exemptions. 
The following activities as set forth in chapter 62-624.200, F.A.C., as amended, shall be exempt from the requirements of this division to the extent that these discharges meet state water quality standards: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwaters; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20); 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(10)  Irrigation water; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(13)  Footing drains; 
(14)  Lawn watering runoff; 
(15)  Water from individual residential car washing; 
(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(17)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(18)  Residual street wash water; and, 
(19)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 4, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-136. - NPDES permits. 
(a)  Any person who holds a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit which provides for an authorized connection and/or authorized discharge to the county's MS4 or regulated waters, shall provide a copy of such permit to the county administrator no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the effective date of this division or thirty (30) calendar days after the issuance of said permits. 
(b)  Authorized discharges to the county's MS4 shall be controlled so that they do not impair the operation of the county's MS4 or contribute to the failure of the county's MS4 to meet any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(c)  Authorized discharges to regulated waters shall be controlled so that they do not adversely impact the quality or beneficial uses of those waters or result in violation of any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 5, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-137. - Prohibition of illicit connections and illicit discharges. 
Illicit connections and illicit discharges are prohibited. Owners and/or persons responsible for or currently operating an illicit connection or illicit discharge shall provide corrective measures in accordance with section 3-5-140. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 6, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-138. - Discharges from commercial, industrial or construction activities to the MS4 or regulated waters. 
(a)  Stormwater from areas of any commercial, industrial or construction activities shall be controlled, treated and managed on-site using BMPs so as not to cause an illicit discharge to the county's MS4 or regulated waters. 
(b)  All erosion, pollutant, and sediment controls required by any applicable local, state, or federal permit, including elements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan required under a NPDES permit and the county's land development regulations, shall be properly implemented, installed, operated, and maintained. 
(c)  Authorized discharges to the county's MS4 shall be controlled so that they do not impair the operation of the county's MS4 or contribute to the failure of the county's MS4 to meet any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(d)  Authorized discharges to regulated waters shall be controlled so that they do not adversely impact the quality or beneficial uses of those waters or result in violation of any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 7, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-139. - Control of pollutant contributions from interconnected MS4s. 
Interconnected MS4s shall be controlled so that they do not impair the operation of or contribute to the failure of the receiving MS4 to meet any applicable local, state, or federal law or regulation. Owners of sections of an interconnected MS4s shall be responsible for the quality within their portion of the system and shall coordinate with the owners of the downstream segments. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 8, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-140. - Compliance. 
(a)  County personnel shall be granted access to inspect facilities or activities discharging or suspected of discharging to the MS4 or regulated waters in order to effectuate this division and to investigate potential violations of this division. All structures and processes that allow discharges, and all records concerning them, shall be made accessible to county personnel for monitoring of the quality of the discharges. 
(b)  Structural controls and other BMPs used to reduce or eliminate pollutants in discharges shall be operated and maintained at all times by the person owning and/or operating the facility or activity so as to function in accordance with the permitted design or performance criteria of all applicable permits and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § A, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-141. - Reporting and correction of illicit connections and illicit discharges. 
(a)  Persons responsible for and/or currently operating known illicit connections or illicit discharges shall immediately initiate procedures to cease discharging and provide suitable containment facilities. Such procedures shall include a requirement to obtain approval from the county administrator of a schedule for implementing proposed corrective measures. 
(b)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the county's MS4 is prohibited. This prohibition includes illicit connections made prior to the effective date of this division, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Immediately upon discovery, persons currently operating an illicit connection shall initiate procedures to cease discharging and remove said illicit connection. Such procedures shall include a requirement to obtain approval from the county administrator of a schedule for implementing proposed corrective measures including authorized containment, and cleanup of any discharge. 
(c)  As soon as a person responsible for and/or currently operating a commercial, industrial or construction activity obtains information of a suspected illicit discharge or illicit connection to the MS4 or regulated waters from said activity, then all necessary actions shall be taken to locate the illicit discharge or illicit connection and, upon discovery, immediately initiate procedures to cease the illicit discharge and/or remove the illicit connection. Further, a schedule for implementing additional proposed corrective measures including authorized containment and cleanup of any discharge shall be submitted in writing to the county administrator for approval prior to implementation. In the event of a discharge of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). 
(d)  The county may require, by written notice, that any owner and/or person engaged in any activity or owning or operating any facility that may cause or contribute to illicit connections or illicit discharges to the county's MS4 or regulated waters to undertake at said owner's and/or person's expense such monitoring and analysis and furnish such reports to the county as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(e)  All owners and/or persons in violation of this division shall address such violations immediately. Violations shall be addressed as set forth in this section by providing a written response to the county administrator, outlining the temporary and permanent measures that have or will be taken to correct the violation and a proposed schedule for completion of each of the corrective measures. Corrective actions are subject to the approval of the county administrator. 
(f)  Persons responsible for a discharge which adversely impacts a regulated water shall be liable for all sampling and analytical costs incurred in monitoring the discharge, any county, state or federal fines imposed as a result of the discharge and the cost of removing or properly treating the discharge for complete restoration of the quality the regulated waters. 
(g)  If the owner and/or person responsible for a violation fail(s) to take corrective action approved by the county administrator, the county has the right to take remedial action. The owner and/or person responsible for the illicit discharge or illicit connection shall reimburse all costs incurred by the county in taking such actions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 10, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 3-5-142. - Enforcement and penalties. 
This division may be enforced by any method prescribed by law, including injunctive relief and the provisions of F.S. chapter 162, and any ordinances enacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001, § 11, 1-8-08) 
Secs. 3-5-143—3-5-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2022-061, §§ 1,2, adopted Dec. 13, 2022, repealed Art. VI, §§ 3-5-151—3-5-172, which pertained to development authority and derived from Laws of Fla., Ch. 61-1357, §§ 1—12, 15—24; Laws of Fla., Ch. 70-628, §§ 1, 2; Laws of Fla., Ch. 73-430, § 1; Laws of Fla., Ch. 84-406, §§ 1—4, 7, 8; Laws of Fla., Ch. 88-479, § 1; and Laws of Fla., Ch. 91-399, § 1. 

Secs. 3-5-151—3-5-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GASPARILLA ISLAND 

Sec. 3-5-186. - Short title. 
This act [this article] shall be known and cited as the Gasparilla Island Conservation District Act. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 2) 
Sec. 3-5-187. - Rules of construction. 
This act [this article] shall not be construed as limiting the application of or repealing any local comprehensive land use plan or law or rule dealing with the subject of zoning, conservation, or air and water pollution standards or advertising (signs); but is any of the standards specified by this act [this article] are more restrictive than those specified in such other plan, law or rule, the standards specified by this act [this article] shall prevail. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 5) 
Editor's note— Temporary provisions in the above section, relating to the territory affected by this article, have been omitted. 
Sec. 3-5-188. - Violations. 
Any owner of real property within the district may enjoin the violation of this act [this article] and/or enforce the provisions of this act [this article] by instituting civil proceedings filed in a court of competent jurisdiction. In order to enforce the provisions of this act [this article] and/or to enjoin a violation of same, a real property owner need not allege or prove that the violation of this act [this article] will adversely affect the property rights of said real property owner to any greater extent or different degree than said violation will affect any other real property owner within the district. A real property owner who is successful in his/her efforts to enforce this act [this article] through civil proceedings shall be awarded a reasonable attorney's fee and court costs which shall be assessed as a judgment against the person or persons determined by the court to have violated this act [this article]. No action by any county commission shall be required as a condition precedent to enforcement of this act [this article] pursuant to this section. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 6) 
Sec. 3-5-189. - Findings of fact. 
The Legislature of the State of Florida hereby finds that Gasparilla Island, including Boca Grande Isles and Gasparilla Golf Course Island, Three Sisters Island, Hoagen's Key and Loomis Island, lying within Charlotte County and Lee County, including all adjacent submerged lands, tidal lands, overflow lands and tidal ponds, are fragile barrier islands as defined in the Presidential directive on barrier islands dated May 23, 1977, and are areas of particular natural beauty containing abundant plant, marine, animal and bird life. The conservation of the natural beauty, plant, marine, animal and bird life of the islands is in the best interest of the residents and property owners of the islands and the citizens of Lee and Charlotte Counties and the State of Florida. The manner and extent to which development of the islands is permitted to occur will have a substantial effect on the ecology and natural beauty of the islands. In order to preserve and conserve the fragile ecosystems and natural characteristics of the islands, it is necessary to restrict by this act [this article] land uses and the height and density of structures and to prevent the proliferation of exterior advertising signs on the island. The purpose of this act [this article] is to permit limited development of the islands while preserving the natural beauty and plant, marine, animal and bird life. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 1) 
Sec. 3-5-190. - District creation and boundaries. 
There is hereby created a special conservation district, for the uses and purposes set forth herein, known as the Gasparilla Island Conservation District. The boundaries of the district are determined as follows: All of Gasparilla Island, including Boca Grande Isles and Gasparilla Golf Course Island, Three Sisters Island, Hoagen's Key, and Loomis Island, situated in Lee County and Charlotte County, including all adjacent submerged lands, tidal lands, overflow lands, and tidal ponds. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 3) 
Sec. 3-5-191. - Density, height, land uses and advertisement. 
(1)  "Dwelling unit" means a room or group of rooms designed, used, or intended as a single habitable unit which provides permanent, semi-permanent, or transient living and sleeping facilities, whether or not it contains cooking or kitchen facilities. "Dwelling unit" includes, but is not limited to, single-family residences, a residence within a two-family or multifamily structure, and hotels, motels, and other commercial rental units. 
(2)  No building or other structure shall be erected or altered within the district so that the peak of the roof is more than thirty-eight (38) feet above the average grade of the lot or parcel on which the building or structure is located, or is more than forty-two (42) feet above mean sea level, whichever is lower. 
(3)  No parcel of land within the district shall be utilized so that the density of dwelling units per acre (including commercial rental dwelling units) exceeds five (5) dwelling units per acre, except the dwelling unit construction allowed under subsection (5) and except dwelling units in existence on the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida. If such existing dwelling units compute at a higher density than five (5) units per acre, no additional dwelling units shall be added. The right to repair or rebuild any such nonconforming existing dwelling units having a higher density utilization than allowed hereunder, shall be governed by the local government zoning regulations. 
(4)  In computing the density of dwelling units, only land above mean sea level, contiguous and under single ownership, may be used. Only the number of dwelling units represented by a full fraction of five (5) shall be permitted, and, if the land is less than one (1) acre, the density shall be reduced proportionately. Parcels that are bisected by publicly dedicated walkways or roads, including state and county roads, shall not be considered contiguous for the purpose of computing density hereunder. 
(5)  One (1) single-family dwelling may be constructed upon either a single substandard lot or a grouping of such lots under one (1) ownership, which lot or lots are a part of a subdivision that was officially platted and recorded prior to the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida, provided such construction is allowed under the local government zoning regulations. If a transfer of ownership of two (2) or more of said substandard lots that are contiguous occurs (other than by inheritance or will) subsequent to the effective date of this 1983 act [this article], the density and other limitations and restrictions of this act [this article] shall apply. 
(6)  No land within the district shall be used for commercial, industrial, multifamily or duplex purposes, except land that was zoned for such use prior to the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida; provided, however, that, in any event, any dwelling units constructed subsequent to the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida, shall not exceed a density of five (5) dwelling units per acre. The only zoning change permissible within the district, subsequent to the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida, is a zoning change to a single-family residential classification. Nothing contained in this act [this article] shall preclude maintenance of fuel supply facilities at existing ports or off-loading facilities. 
(7)  No local governmental body or agency shall have the authority to grant variances or exceptions to the height, density or sign requirements, or to any other provisions or requirement of this act [this article]. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Lee County Board of County Commissioners or the Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners, in their respective counties, may grant the right to repair, renovate, or rebuild any nonconforming existing dwelling unit or structure occupied for use as of the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida, upon a finding of the board of county commissioners in the respective county that the traditional use of such structures has served the public and community benefit. However, no such reconstruction, rebuilding, or renovation of such nonconforming structure shall be allowed to a density or building height or use greater than that authorized under the provisions of this act [this article] or the present nonconformity, whichever is greater. As used in this subsection: 
(a)  "Nonconforming building or structure" is a building or structure, the size, dimension, or location of which was in existence prior to the effective date of Chapter 80-473, Laws of Florida, but which fails, by reason of the adoption of this act [this article], and existing county building and zoning regulations, to conform to the present requirements of zoning regulations. 
(b)  "Traditional use" may include, but is not limited to the longevity of use, contribution of the use to the community and historic integrity of the community, and uniqueness of the use in context with the adjoining land uses. 
(c)  When the nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months after being damaged or destroyed and no permits for reconstruction, renovation, or repair have been applied for within that period, the board of county commissioners may not grant permission for use of the structure except in conformance with the provisions of this act [this article] and applicable county codes, regulations, or ordinances. 
(8)  No exterior advertising sign shall be erected or displayed within the district except on-site signs which relate in subject matter to the premises on which they are located. Exterior advertising signs which are banners, beacons, neon, rotating, flashing or animated are prohibited. 
(9)  This section shall not render legally existing structures or signs unlawful. 
(10)  The Gasparilla Inn Historic Resort Area. 
(a)  Creation and boundaries. There is hereby created, because of its special and irreplaceable historic significance and community importance, the Gasparilla Inn Historic Resort Area. The territory of the area consists of the following described parcels of land: 
1.  A parcel of land lying easterly of Boca Grande Bayou in Government Lot 1 and in the east half (E½) of the southeast quarter (SE¼), Section 14, Township 43 South, Range 20 East, Gasparilla Island, Lee County, Florida, which tract or parcel is described as follows: 
From the southeast corner of the intersection of Palm Avenue and Seventh Street as shown on Revised Plat of Boca Grande recorded in Plat Book 7 at page 1, Lee County Records, run N 89° 23' 55" E along the south line of said Seventh Street as shown on said plat and an easterly prolongation thereof for 1,250 feet; thence run S 30° 36' 05" E for 100 feet to the Point of Beginning. From said Point of Beginning run N 30° 36' 05" W for 800 feet; thence run S 59° 23' 55" W for 220 feet more or less to the waters of Boca Grande Bayou; thence run southeasterly along said waters for 850 feet more or less to an intersection with the line bearing S 59° 23' 55" W and passing through the Point of Beginning; thence run N 59° 23' 55" E along said line for 140 feet more or less to the Point of Beginning. Containing 3.2 acres more or less. 
Bearings hereinabove mentioned are based on assuming the south line of Seventh Street to bear N 89° 23' 55" E. 
2.  A parcel of land lying in Government Lots 3 and 4, Section 14, Township 43 South, Range 20 East, Gasparilla Island, Lee County, Florida, which tract or parcel is described as follows: 
Beginning at the northwest corner of the intersection of Gilchrist Avenue (120 feet wide) and Fourth Street (60 feet wide) as shown on Revised Plat of Boca Grande recorded in Plat Book 7 at page 1, Lee County Records, run northerly along the westerly line of said Gilchrist Avenue and a northerly prolongation thereof for 510 feet to the north line of Fifth Street as shown on said plat; thence run easterly along said north line for 374.01 feet to the westerly line of Gasparilla Road (60 feet wide) as shown on said plat; thence run northerly along said westerly line for 599.04 feet to the south line of Seventh Street (50 feet wide) as shown on said plat; thence run westerly along said south line and a westerly prolongation thereof for 608 feet more or less to the mean high water line of the Gulf of Mexico; thence run southerly along said line for 1,110 feet more or less to an intersection with a westerly prolongation of the north line of said Fourth Street; thence run easterly along said prolongation and said north line for 350 feet more or less to the Point of Beginning. 
Excepting therefrom that part of Fifth Street (110 feet wide) as shown on said Revised Plat of Boca Grande lying within the herein above described parcel. Containing 12.4 acres more or less net of said Fifth Street right-of-way. 
3.  A parcel of land lying in Government Lots 1, 3 and 4 and in the east half (E½) of the southeast quarter (SE¼), Section 14, Township 43 South, Range 20 East, Gasparilla Island, Lee County, Florida, which tract or parcel is described as follows: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of the intersection of East Avenue (40.2 feet wide) and Fifth Street (60 feet wide) as shown on Revised Plat of Boca Grande recorded in Plat Book 7 at page 1, Lee County Records, run easterly along the north line of said Fifth Street and an easterly prolongation thereof for 1,340 feet more or less to the waters of Boca Grande Bayou; thence run northwesterly along said waters for 640 feet more or less to an intersection with the south line of Seventh Street (50 feet wide) as shown on said plat; thence run westerly along said south line for 340 feet more or less to an intersection with the southerly prolongation of the east line of Lots 23 and 26, Block 57 said Revised Plat of Boca Grande; thence run northerly along said prolongation and said east line for 248 feet more or less to said waters of Boca Grande Bayou on the south line of Eight[h] Street (491.55 feet wide) as shown on said plat; thence run westerly along said south line and the north line of said Block 57 for 575 feet more or less to the northwest corner of the east half (E½) of Lot 4 said Block 57; thence run southerly along the west line of said east half (E½) of Lot 4 for 124 feet more or less to the southwest corner of said east half (E½); thence run easterly for 25 feet more or less to the northwest corner of Lot 3 of said Block 57; thence run southerly along the west line of said Lot 3 and a southerly prolongation thereof for 174 feet more or less to said south line of Seventh Street; thence westerly along said south line for 310 feet more or less to an intersection with the east line of said East Avenue as shown on said plat; thence run southerly along said east line for 599 feet more or less to the Point of Beginning. 
Excepting therefrom those parts of the rights-of-way for Palm Avenue (58.27 feet wide) and Seventh Street as shown on said Revised Plat for Boca Grande lying within the hereinabove described parcel. 
Containing 19.7 acres more or less net of said road rights-of-way. 
(b)  Standards for construction. The historic resort area is found to have traditional uses which are of a public benefit for the operation and maintenance of a resort inn complex and all amenities and facilities associated with such uses, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, swimming pools, recreational complex, golf shop, employee housing, and such auxiliary buildings and facilities as necessary for the operation and maintenance of such a complex, and shall be able to maintain such use, notwithstanding the other restrictions of this act [this article] as to residential density, except as provided in this subsection. 
(c)  Restrictions. The residential density restrictions of this act [this article] do not apply within the boundaries of the historic resort area if such residential density does not exceed eighty (80) resort room accommodations, one hundred nine (109) employee dwelling units, and fifty-six (56) other residential dwelling units. All other land uses, building standards or restrictions, or activities within the historic resort area are governed by the provisions of this act [this article] and by the Lee County Comprehensive Plan where not in conflict with this act [this article]. However, the Lee County Board of County Commissioners, in application of its zoning, parking, setback, and other land use ordinances, rules, or regulations, shall take into consideration the special and historic significance and traditional land uses of the historic resort area and the area's location on a sensitive barrier island. 
(Laws of Fla., Ch. 80-473, § 4; Laws of Fla., Ch. 83-385, § 1; Laws of Fla., Ch. 86-341, § 1) 
Secs. 3-5-192—3-5-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DOGS IN DESIGNATED AREAS OF FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 3-5-206. - Definitions. 
In this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this article shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
Department: The Charlotte County Community Development Department, or its successor. 
Division: The Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Hotels and Restaurants, or its successor. 
Employee: Employee or employees shall include, but is not limited to, the owner or owners of the food service establishment. 
Food service establishment: Food service establishment is defined in section 2-3-21, of the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2018-032, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 3-5-207. - Requirements of food service establishments which allow dogs. 
(a)  Food service establishments that have received a permit pursuant to this article are exempt from those sections of the Food and Drug Administration Food Code that prohibit live animals in food service establishments. 
(b)  No dog shall be in a food service establishment unless allowed by state law and the food service establishment has received and maintains an unexpired permit pursuant to this article allowing dogs in designated outdoor areas of the establishment. 
(c)  Food service establishments must apply for and receive a permit from the department before patrons' dogs are allowed on the premises. The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida ("board") shall adopt by resolution a reasonable fee to pay for the cost of processing the initial application, permitting, inspections, renewals, and enforcement. The application for a permit shall require the following information: 
(1)  Name, location, mailing address and division-issued license number of the food service establishment. 
(2)  Title, name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the permit applicant. Applications are accepted from only the owner of the food service establishment or the owner's authorized agent, which authorization must be in writing and notarized. The food service establishment shall also provide the name, mailing address, and telephone contact information of the owner to the department if the owner is not the permit applicant. 
(3)  A diagram and description of the outdoor area which is requested to be designated as available to patrons' dogs, including: 
a.  Dimensions of the designated area; 
b.  A depiction of the number and placement of tables, chairs, and restaurant equipment, if any; the entryways and exits to the designated outdoor area; 
c.  The boundaries of the designated area and of the other outdoor dining areas not available for patrons' dogs; 
d.  Any fences or other barriers; and 
e.  Surrounding and adjacent property lines and public rights-of-way, including sidewalks and common pathways. 
(4)  The diagram referenced in subsection (3) above shall be accurate and to scale but need not be prepared by a licensed design professional. A copy of the approved diagram shall be attached to the permit. 
(5)  A list of the days of the week and hours of operation that patrons' dogs will be permitted in the designated outdoor area of the food service establishment. 
(d)  Food service establishments that receive a permit to allow dogs in a designated outdoor area pursuant to this article shall require that: 
(1)  Employees shall wash their hands promptly after touching, petting, or otherwise handling any dog. 
(2)  Employees shall be prohibited from touching, petting, or otherwise handling any dog while serving food or beverages or handling tableware or before entering other parts of the food service establishment. 
(3)  Patrons in a designated outdoor area shall be advised by appropriate signage, at conspicuous locations, that they should wash their hands before eating and waterless hand sanitizer be provided at all tables in the designated outdoor area. 
(4)  Patrons keep their dogs under control and on a leash at all times. 
(5)  Employees and patrons shall not allow dogs to come into contact with serving dishes, utensils, tableware, linens, paper products, or any other items involved with food service operations. 
(6)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any part of a dog to be on chairs, tables, or other furnishings. 
(7)  Employees shall clean and sanitize all table and chair surfaces with an approved product between seating of patrons. 
(8)  Employees shall remove all dropped food and spilled drink from the floor or ground as soon as possible but in no event less frequently than between seating of patrons at the nearest table. 
(9)  Employees and patrons shall remove all dog waste immediately and the floor or ground be immediately cleaned and sanitized with an approved product. Employees shall keep a kit with the appropriate materials for this purpose near the designated outdoor area. 
(10)  Employees and patrons shall not permit dogs to be in, or to travel through, indoor or non-designated outdoor portions of the Food Service Establishment. 
(11)  At all times while the designated outdoor portion of the food service establishment is available to patrons and their dogs, at least one sign shall be posted in a conspicuous and public location near the entrance to the designated outdoor portion of the food service establishment, notifying patrons that the designated outdoor portion of the food service establishment is currently available to patrons accompanied by their dog or dogs. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half (8½) inches in width and eleven (11) inches in height and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than 20-point font size. 
(12)  At least one (1) sign reminding patrons of the applicable rules, including those contained in this part, and any permit conditions, which may be imposed by the department, shall be posted in a conspicuous location within the designated outdoor portion of the food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half (8½) inches in width and eleven (11) inches in height and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than 20-point font size. 
(13)  At least one (1) sign reminding employees of the applicable rules, including those contained in this part, and any permit conditions, which may be imposed by the department, shall be posted in a conspicuous location frequented by employees within the food service establishment. The mandatory sign shall be not less than eight and one-half (8½) inches in width and eleven (11) inches in height and printed in easily legible typeface of not less than 20-point font size. 
(14)  Ingress and egress to the designated outdoor area shall not require entrance into or passage through any indoor area or non-designated outdoor portions of the food service establishment. 
(15)  The food service establishment and designated outdoor area shall comply with all permit conditions and the approved diagram. 
(16)  Employees and patrons shall not allow any dog to be in the designated outdoor areas of the food service establishment if the food service establishment is in violation of any of the requirements of this article. 
(17)  Permits shall be conspicuously displayed in the designated outdoor area. 
(e)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall expire automatically upon the sale of the food service establishment and cannot be transferred to a subsequent owner. The subsequent owner may apply for a permit pursuant to this article if the subsequent owner wishes to continue to allow patrons' dogs in a designated outdoor area of the food service establishment. Permits shall expire on June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-032, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 3-5-208. - Complaints and reporting. 
(a)  Complaints may be made in writing to the department. The department shall accept, document, and respond to all complaints and shall timely report to the division all complaints and the response to such complaints. 
(b)  The department shall provide the division with a copy of all approved applications and permits issued. 
(c)  All applications, permits, and other related materials shall contain the division issued license number for the food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2018-032, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 3-5-209. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Each instance of a dog on the premises of a food service establishment that does not have a valid permit authorizing dogs at the food service establishment is a separate violation. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the department to enforce the provisions of this article within Charlotte County. 
(c)  A permit may be revoked by the department if, after notice and reasonable time in which the grounds for revocation may be corrected as specified in the notice, the food service establishment fails to comply with any condition of the permit, fails to comply with the approved diagram, fails to maintain any required state or local license, or is found to be in violation of any provision of this article. If the ground for revocation is a failure to maintain any required state or local license, the revocation may take effect immediately upon giving notice of revocation to the permit holder. 
(d)  If a food service establishment's permit for allowing dogs at the food service establishment is revoked, no new permit may be approved for the food service establishment until the expiration of one hundred eighty (180) days following the date of revocation. 
(e)  Any food service establishment that fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of violating this part of the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances and shall be subject to any and all enforcement proceedings consistent with the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida and general law. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(f)  This article shall not apply to the use of dogs as service animals under federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-032, § 1, 7-24-18) 
Secs. 3-5-210—3-5-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 3-5-226—3-5-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 2002, repealed Art. X, §§ 3-5-246—3-5-251, which pertained to historic preservation, derived from Ord. No. 89-28, §§ 5—10, adopted May 8, 1989, and enacted in lieu thereof a new Art. X, §§ 3-5-246—3-5-254, which pertained to the same subject matter. 

Sec. 3-5-246. - Short title, applicability, intent and purpose. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "Charlotte County Historic Preservation Ordinance". 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County. 
(c)  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect and enhance properties of historic, cultural, archaeological, and architectural value in the interests of the health, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of the county. This article is intended to: 
(1)  Protect, preserve and enhance the historic, architectural, and archaeological heritage of the county. 
(2)  Provide where possible, programs which will assist in the perpetuation, rehabilitation and adaptive use and reuse of historically and architecturally significant structures, sites, districts and archaeological resources. 
(3)  Protect and enhance the county's attractiveness to residents and to visitors and thereby provide stimulus to the county's economy. 
(4)  Foster civic pride and community education about the accomplishments and activities of past inhabitants of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-247. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined herein, words or phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable application. 
Building: A structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as an office, house, church, hotel or similar structure. Buildings may refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail. 
Calendar days: The consecutive days of the week, including weekends and holidays. 
Contributing property: Any property, whether improved or unimproved, which contains characteristics supportive of a historic designation enacted by the board of county commissioners. 
Demolition: The complete removal of a building, structure or any substantial part thereof from a site. 
Demolition by neglect: The willful abandonment or neglect of a building or structure by the owner(s) resulting in such a state of deterioration that its self-destruction is inevitable or where demolition of the building or structure to remove a health or safety hazard is a likely result. 
Development or development activity: 
(1)  Clearing, scraping or removing the vegetation from a site; or 
(2)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavation, leveling, grading, digging, borrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soils of a site; provided, however, 
(3)  This definition shall not apply to the routine trimming or maintenance of vegetation. 
Designation report: A written document indicating the basis for the recommendation of the historic preservation board to the board of county commissioners on the proposed historic or archaeological designation pursuant to this article. 
Florida Master Site File: The list or catalogue of all recorded historical and archaeological sites and properties in Florida maintained by the State of Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources. 
Historic district: Any location within the unincorporated area of the county designated by the board of county commissioners through resolution, ordinance, or other official action as being of historic significance to the county. 
Historic preservation board representative: That person or persons designated by the historic preservation board to review proposed development activities and provide comments and recommendations to county staff. The chairman of the historic preservation board may serve as representative. 
Historic preservation board staff liaison or liaison: The designated representative of the county development director. 
Historic resource buffer zone: The area located within a three hundred (300) foot perimeter around a historic resource or historic property. 
Historic resource or historic property: Any prehistoric, historic, or archaeological district, site, building, structure, or object included in the National Register of Public Places, Florida Master Site File or Local Register. Such term includes mounds, artifacts, records, and remains which are related to such a district, site, building, structure, object, or culture. 
Involuntary demolition: Destruction of a building, structure, or other improvement on a property upon order of the county. 
Local register: A listing of buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts which have been designated as historically significant in the county. 
National Register or National Register of Historic Places: The official listing of sites and properties throughout the United States maintained by the keeper of the National Register, National Park Service. 
Ordinary maintenance: Work not requiring a building permit, done to prevent deterioration of a building or structure for decay of or damage to a building or a structure or any part thereof by restoring the building or structure as nearly as practicable to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay or damage. 
Owner or owners: Those individuals, partnerships, corporations, public agencies, or other legal entities holding fee simple title to real property. "Owner or owners" do not include individuals, partnerships, corporations, public agencies, or other legal entities holding easements or less than fee interest (including leaseholds) of any nature. 
Survey, reconnaissance or intensive: Background documentary research into a community's history, archaeology and architecture and site field work as set forth in the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Archaeology and Historic Preservation. 
Working days: Also commonly referred to as business days, Monday through Friday, not including legal holidays ("dates of observance") authorized by the board of county commissioners during which the county's offices are not open. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-248. - Historic preservation board. 
(a)  The board of county commissioners is authorized to establish the historic preservation board which shall consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the board of county commissioners. Vacancies on the historic preservation board shall be filled through appointment by the board of county commissioners within sixty (60) days after a vacancy occurs. 
(b)  Members of the historic preservation board shall have demonstrated an interest in historic and/or archaeological preservation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-249. - Authority of the historic preservation board. 
The historic preservation board shall have the responsibility to perform the following functions: 
(1)  To identify for the board of county commissioners historically significant structures and sites that should be considered for designation and placement on the local register or be nominated for listing in the Florida Master Site File or the National Register of Historic Places. 
(2)  To recommend to the board of county commissioners historically significant structures and sites for protection and/or potential purchase by the county. 
(3)  To promote public awareness of historic and archaeological preservation and its community benefits. 
(4)  To meet with and assist, where appropriate, the owner(s) of a historic resource or a potential historic resource. 
(5)  To advise county staff regarding the potential effects of development activities on historic resources in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-250. - Designation. 
The board of county commissioners may designate and place on the local register any prehistoric or historic district, site, building, structure or object of historical, architectural or archaeological value in and related to the county, and may recommend or nominate a site for inclusion in the Florida Master Site File or the National Register of Historic Places. To ensure a consistent data base, a Florida Master Site File form shall be completed for each local register site. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-250.1. - Maintenance of historic resource GIS database. 
The location of each historic resource buffer zone shall be placed as an overlay within the county's geographic information systems database where it shall be utilized in the county's review of development activities to ensure compliance with the requirements contained herein. The overlay shall be updated as needed to ensure that the county's review is based on current, best available information. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-250.2. - Conservation of historic resources during development activities. 
(a)  The county shall review all proposed development, including Group II and Group III excavations, for potential impacts to historic resources according to the existing review processes in place for the specific type of development. If a proposed development activity is within a historic resource buffer zone or otherwise has the potential to impact historic resources, the county department undertaking the review shall notify the historic preservation board staff liaison (or "liaison") who shall forward the application to the historic preservation board representative ("HPBR") for review and comment as provided below. The liaison shall also notify applicants that the application has been forwarded to the HPBR. 
(b)  The HPBR shall review all applications forwarded to his or her attention and provide comments to the liaison within ten (10) working days from the date of notification. The review of the HPBR shall be conducted concurrently with other reviews. If the HPBR fails to respond within ten (10) working days, the county may approve or deny the subject application without historic preservation board input. If the HPBR determines that a development activity may adversely impact historic resources, the applicant shall provide a survey performed by a professional archaeologist licensed in the State of Florida which describes the historic resources found on site accompanied by a report which makes recommendations for the appropriate treatment of such resources. The survey and report shall be provided to the liaison who shall immediately forward it to the HPBR for review and comment. The HPBR shall have ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of the survey and report to conduct his or her review and provide comments to the liaison. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the property owner to propose measures to ensure the conservation and recordation of historic resources or to limit the time allocated to the property owner for the completion of surveys or conservation work. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the county from continuing its internal review of applications concurrently with the preparation of professional surveys and reports, as well as review by the HPBR, as required by this section. 
(c)  The county shall not grant approval for any development activity which adversely affects historic resources until such time as it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the community development director that every reasonable effort has been made to preserve the historic resources on site, or that adequate measures will be taken to offset the effects of development on the historic resources. For development applications for which professional surveys and reports have been prepared in conformance with this section, the community development director shall not grant approval unless it is demonstrated that every reasonable effort has been made to accomplish the recommendations of the report. Adequate measures may include but shall not be limited to on-site relocation, off-site relocation, inventory and analysis conducted by a professional archeologist (including photographic or other documentation), utilization of the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, or other actions whereby the historic significance of the historic resources may be properly documented and recorded for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations. If historic resources are to be left in an undisturbed state or relocated and preserved off-site, then that portion of the property on which the resources exist shall be placed under a perpetual conservation easement granted to the board of county commissioners, the Florida Department of State Division of Historic Resources, or any other entity mutually agreeable to the county and the applicant. Establishment of a conservation easement shall not preclude compatible uses of the resources in accordance with federal, state, or local laws. Nothing herein shall be construed to mandate or preclude, at the property owner's sole discretion, public access to areas placed under a conservation easement. 
(d)  If previously unknown matters which, in the judgement of the community development director would qualify as historic resources, are discovered on a property on which development activities have been approved, or if there is a change in the design, location, or scope of the activity which may be reasonably construed to pose a threat to historic resources, the county may reconsider or suspend its approval of said activities until such time as the potential impacts to the resources may be quantified and addressed as provided above. The county's suspension of development activities shall be limited to those portions of a development activity which may adversely impact the resources. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-251. - Rehabilitation, moving, maintenance, repair, use and demolition of historic structures. 
(a)  Rehabilitation and moving. In conformance with the Standard Building Code as amended and as adopted by the county, the repairs, alterations and additions, or moving of a structure necessary for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a building or structure may be made without conformance to the technical codes when the building official judges such to be safe and in the public interest. 
(b)  Maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure which does not involve a change of design, appearance or material, and which does not require a building permit. 
(c)  Use. 
(1)  Structures which have been designated as historic properties shall be exempt from the provisions of the zoning code pertaining to nonconforming structures. 
(2)  Owners of historic properties may petition the board of county commissioners to allow any type of use which would serve to perpetuate the viable contemporary utilization of the historic property, regardless of whether such use is permitted in the zoning district in which the historic property is located. The board of county commissioners' approval shall be granted through entering into a developer's agreement with the owners of the historic property which agreement shall be binding upon subsequent owners and assigns. 
(d)  Voluntary demolition. Approval of a voluntary application for demolition of a designated historic resource or a contributing property within a designated historic district may be delayed by the liaison for up to thirty (30) calendar days to allow the historic preservation board to seek possible alternatives to demolition. The board of county commissioners must approve a delay of over thirty (30) calendar days. The applicant may petition the board of county commissioners at that time to limit the delay on the basis that retention of the historic resource or contributing property would deny the owner of all economically viable use of the historic resource or contributing property, thus creating an undue economic hardship. 
(e)  Involuntary demolition. The building official shall immediately notify the liaison of cases where there are emergency conditions dangerous to life, health or property affecting a historic resource and the liaison shall notify the HPBR. Prior to ordering the demolition of a historic resource, the building official shall consult with the HPBR to determine whether there are alternatives to demolition available that ameliorate the threat to the pubic health, safety, and welfare without necessitating destruction of the historic resource. 
(f)  Demolition by neglect. In the event the historic preservation board determines that a property within a designated historic district or a designated historic resource is being so poorly maintained as to endanger its historic integrity, the historic preservation board shall have the authority to request that the owner of the historic resource attend a meeting to discuss the condition of the building and a possible course of action to prevent further deterioration. If the owner fails to attend the meeting or take action to prevent further deterioration, the historic preservation board may request the building official to institute code enforcement proceedings to remedy the problem. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-251.2. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  Any work conducted contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped upon written notice from the county that the work does not conform to the terms of this article. 
(b)  When an unmarked human burial is discovered, all activity that may disturb the unmarked human burial shall immediately cease and the local law enforcement agency and/or the district medical examiner shall immediately be notified in accordance with applicable Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-251.3. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Disturbance or destruction of any historic resources in violation of this article, or violation of the provisions of any approval issued hereunder, resulting from willful acts or gross negligence, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that, as provided in F.S. section 162.09(2), as may be amended, if a code enforcement board finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation. 
(b)  The provisions of this article, or of any approval issued hereunder, may be enforced by any other means available at law or in equity, including injunctive proceedings or code enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Any development approval obtained in violation of this article, or based on the submission of false, misleading, or incomplete information, shall be voidable at the discretion of the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-252. - Variance. 
Variances to the terms and provisions of this article will be in accordance with the provisions of section 3-5-6.1 except that, in addition to the criteria enumerated in section 3-5-6.1(d), the board of zoning appeals will also consider the intent of this article in context with the zoning code, development regulations, and the county's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-253. - Appeal. 
Any aggrieved party may appeal any determination of the community development director pursuant to this article by filing with the community development director a petition stating the nature of the determination and the allegation of factual or interpretive error. Upon review of the petition and all relevant information, the community development director shall place the appeal on the agenda of the board of county commissioners during one of its regular meetings in the form of a public hearing with notice to the petitioner and after advertising in the county's newspaper of record no later than two (2) weeks (fourteen (14) calendar days) prior to the hearing. Following the close of the hearing, the board of county commissioners may uphold or deny the petition, or may amend the subject determination based on the facts as provided in the hearing. If the board of county commissioners determines that additional information is necessary, it may also set a date certain at which the petition will be re-discussed. Decisions of the board of county commissioners may be reviewed by the circuit court. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the board of county commissioners' authority to delegate the appellate duties of this section to the board of zoning appeals, a hearing officer or special master proceeding, or any other lawful procedure selected by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Sec. 3-5-254. - Severability. 
In the event this article conflicts with any other provision of the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances or other applicable law, the more restrictive shall apply. If any subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-060, § 1, 11-12-02) 
Secs. 3-5-255—3-5-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HABITAT CONSERVATION PLAN 

Sec. 3-5-266. - Intent and purpose. 
This chapter is intended to provide Charlotte County landowners an optional alternative to developing their own habitat conservation plan (HCP) and obtaining an incidental take permit (ITP) from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) when proposed development within the regulated area may impact Florida Scrub-jay habitat or otherwise require state or federal permits related to Florida Scrub-jays. This article is not a local regulation requiring mandatory participation, it merely serves to facilitate local permitting and development that is subject to state and federal regulations; therefore, any relief from these regulations shall be sought directly from the appropriate state or federal agency. The purpose of the Charlotte County Scrub-Jay HCP is to: 
(a)  Ensure compliance with the Endangered Species Act of 1973 as Charlotte County implements regulatory permitting programs for building and development. 
(b)  Provide applicants greater regulatory certainty during currently planned development in Charlotte County. 
(c)  Enhance the recovery and long-term viability of the Florida Scrub-jay within Charlotte County. 
(d)  Protect indigenous species characteristic of Florida scrub (including xeric oak scrub and scrubby flatwoods). 
(e)  Follow current standard protection measures for Eastern Indigo Snakes in existing Florida Scrub-jay habitats. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 3-5-267. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
County minimization review process: That review process detailed and incorporated as Appendix 3 within the HCP providing underbrush clearing restrictions, recommended plantings, and preservation requirements. 
Covered activities: All forms of residential and commercial development, including, but not limited to, construction of single-family homes, multiple-unit residential dwellings, commercial properties, public works projects, and all associated improvements of road and utility infrastructure that may be needed to service this development, as well as land management activities within the reserve for long-term habitat improvements. 
Development fee: The fee a landowner must pay in order to mitigate covered activities within or transected by the regulated area pursuant to the Charlotte County ITP and HCP. 
Habitat conservation plan (HCP): The plan, as amended from time to time, developed by Charlotte County and approved by the USFWS, addressing impacts to the state and federally threatened Florida Scrub-jay and Eastern Indigo Snake as they relate to construction and development throughout Charlotte County. 
Incidental take permit (ITP): The permit, as amended from time to time, received by Charlotte County and issued by the USFWS, allowing the take of Florida Scrub-jays and Eastern Indigo Snakes. 
Regulated area: The area that corresponds to the 2011 USFWS review area for Florida Scrub-jays and serves as the boundary within which future development will be subject to the HCP development fee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 3-5-268. - HCP development fees. 
(a)  If a landowner elects to voluntarily utilize the county HCP, then the landowners must pay HCP development fees and comply with the county minimization review process for all covered activities on undeveloped properties within (or transected by) the HCP regulated area, which is analogous to the current USFWS scrub-jay review area. Fees are assessed pursuant to the fee table located in the HCP and are assessed even if a property partially falls out of the regulated area or is only partially developed. 
(b)  The following are exempt from paying HCP development fees: 
(1)  Existing residences. 
a.  If additions and/or ancillary structures on existing residences encroach onto an adjacent lot, then HCP development fees will be assessed on the adjacent lot. 
(2)  Parcels over three (3) acres with an existing residence as long as no clearing of woody vegetation has occurred. 
a.  If there is clearing of any woody vegetation, however, then HCP development fees will be assessed based on the acreage of the woody vegetation area to be cleared. 
(3)  Certain improvements to existing residences: 
a.  Constructing room additions or expansions within the same lot. 
b.  Razing and reconstructing within the previous structure's footprint. 
c.  Razing and constructing a larger structure within the same lot. 
d.  Constructing ancillary structures, including pools, decks, sheds, and detached non-commercial garages within the same lot. 
e.  Mulching/clearing of a ten-foot wide perimeter fire break between lots with existing structures and undeveloped land. 
f.  Removal of dead trees that may pose damage to existing structures. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, landowners seeking underbrush mulching permits must satisfy the Federal Endangered Species Act prior to clearing, and clearing activities shall not occur during the scrub-jay nesting season (March 1 through June 30) without a nesting survey showing that active nesting is not occurring on the lot. 
(d)  HCP development fees collected by Charlotte County shall be expended in accordance with the terms and conditions contained in the HCP and ITP, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-10-15; Ord. No. 2017-043, § 1(Exh. A), 7-25-17) 
Sec. 3-5-269. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-043, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 25, 2017, repealed § 3-5-269, which pertained to enforcement and derived from Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2015. 
Sec. 3-5-270. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-043, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 25, 2017, repealed § 3-5-270, which pertained to violations and penalties and derived from Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, adopted Feb. 10, 2015. 
Sec. 3-5-271. - Appendices. 
The HCP and ITP, as amended from time to time, are hereby incorporated by reference as appendices to this article and any conflict with the requirements herein shall be resolved in favor of and in accordance with the HCP and ITP. Complete copies of the HCP and ITP are available for inspection at the Charlotte County Natural Resources Division. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 3-5-272. - Conflict with state law and federal law. 
Nothing in this article is intended to conflict with the provisions of the Florida Constitution, any Florida Statute, the Federal Constitution or any Federal Statute. In the event of a direct and express conflict between this article and either the Florida Constitution, the Florida Statutes, the Federal Constitution or the Federal Statutes, then the provisions of the Florida Constitution, Florida Statutes, Federal Constitution or the Federal Statutes, as applicable, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003, § 1, 2-10-15) 
Secs. 3-5-273—3-5-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SEA TURTLE PROTECTION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Art. XII, §§ 3-5-296—3-5-304, was derived from Ord. No. 89-31, adopted May 8, 1989. Secs. 3-5-296—3-5-300, and 3-5-302—3-5-304 were amended as herein set out by Ord. No. 98-041, §§ 1—8, adopted June 23, 1998. 

Sec. 3-5-296. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined herein, all words or phrases used in this article shall be ascribed the meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this article its most reasonable application. 
Artificial light shall mean any source of light emanating from a manmade device, including but not limited to, fluorescent, incandescent, mercury, vapor, metal halide or sodium lamps, spotlights, street lights, vehicular lights, construction or security lights. 
Beach shall mean the zone of unconsolidated material that is contiguous with the waters of the Gulf of Mexico and extends landward from the mean low water line to the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegetation (usually the effective limit of storm waves). 
Beach access point shall mean any path through or over the dune used by the general public or private property owners for the purpose of gaining access to the beach. 
Board shall mean the Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County. 
Bug light shall mean any yellow colored light bulb that is marked as being specifically treated to reduce the attraction of insects to the light. 
Coastal construction control line shall mean that line established by the Florida Department of Natural Resources pursuant to F.S. section 161.053. 
Construction shall mean any activity intended to modify or improve site conditions including, but not limited to, building, clearing, filling, excavating, grading, mechanical cleaning or planting of vegetation, or the making of any material change in the size or use of any structure or the appearance of site conditions, or the placement of equipment or material upon such sites. 
County shall mean Charlotte County. 
Department shall mean the Charlotte County Community Development Department. 
Downlighting shall mean light fixtures, generally canister shaped, which direct light predominantly downward and with baffles which reduce and control lateral light preventing the illumination of large areas of building or other reflective surfaces, which is also sometimes known as "wall washing" type illumination. 
Dune shall mean a mound or ridge of loose sediments, lying landward of the beach and deposited by any natural or artificial mechanism, and which is of sufficient expanse and stability to absorb or moderate the destructive force of storm-generated ocean waves. 
Dune profile shall mean the cross-sectional configuration of the dune. 
Flagging shall mean the clear delineation of a sea turtle nest by placing one (1) or more stakes in the ground around, but not in, the nest. 
Floodlight shall mean a reflector type light which is attached directly to a building and which is unshielded. 
Ground-level barrier shall mean any natural or artificial structure rising above the ground which prevents beachfront lighting from shining directly onto the beach-dune system. 
Hatchling shall mean any individual sea turtle, within or outside of a nest, which has recently hatched from an egg. 
Low profile luminaire shall mean a light fixture set on a base which raises the source of the light no higher than twenty-four (24) inches off the ground, and designed in such a way that light is directed downward from a hooded light source. 
Nest shall mean any place in which sea turtle eggs are naturally deposited or relocated beneath the sediments of the beach-dune system. 
Nesting season shall mean the period from May 1 through October 31 of each year. 
Nesting zone shall mean that area of beach and other uplands extending inland from mean high water a distance of three hundred (300) feet, and any other area known to be utilized by sea turtles for nesting purposes. 
Permitted agent of the state shall mean any qualified individual, group or organization possessing a permit from DNR to conduct activities related to sea turtle protection and conservation. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, corporation, group, state officer, or unit of federal, state, county, or municipal government, and all other associations and combinations, whether public or private. 
Primary dune shall mean that portion of the dune system containing the highest point of elevation (crest). In those areas where the dune line is discontinuous or has been breached by natural or unnatural causes, the primary dune shall be considered to be the line formed by linking the proximal primary dune to the north and south of the breach. 
Sea turtle(s) shall mean any species of marine turtle. 
Shielded shall mean fitted with a non-reflective opaque hood, other covering or device which prevents the projection of light from being visible from the beach or from illuminating the nesting zone. 
State shall mean the State of Florida. 
Visible from the beach shall mean visible within a line of sight extending landward from the Gulf of Mexico from any point at mean low water [elevation.] 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-297. - Unlawful to kill, molest, or injure sea turtles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, molest, harass or cause direct or indirect injury to any species of sea turtle in Charlotte County or within its jurisdictional waters. It shall be unlawful to collect, transport, or possess any part of a sea turtle or sea turtle nest and/or egg by other than authorized personnel. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 2, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-298. - Coastal construction conducted within the nesting zone during the nesting season. 
The intent of this section is to prevent the destruction of sea turtle nests as a result of construction activities conducted within the nesting zone. Construction within the nesting zone shall be limited to non-nesting season to the maximum extent possible (November 1 through April 30). Such construction occurring during any portion of the nesting season (May 1 through October 31) shall be conducted during daylight hours, and it shall be the responsibility of the builder to ensure compliance with the following: 
(1)  State permits. 
a.  The builder shall obtain written approval from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 62B-33, Florida Administrative Code, F.S. Ch. 161, and F.S. section 370.12. 
b.  At the time of application for building permits, the builder shall supply a copy of the DEP authorization to the community development department which will notify the authorized DEP turtle permit holder within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the application. 
(2)  Preliminary and daily surveys required. A permitted agent of the state shall conduct a preliminary survey of the construction site on or prior to May 1 and shall determine if the affected areas is utilized or potentially utilized by sea turtles. If such determination is that the site is utilized or potentially utilized as nesting habitat, then subsequent to the preliminary survey, and beginning no later than May 1, daily nesting surveys of the construction site shall be conducted before that day's construction activities as agreed upon or at 9:00 a.m. by a permitted agent until the completion of the project or the end of the nesting season, whichever occurs first. Nests discovered within a project site during preliminary and daily surveys shall be flagged or relocated to a safe habitat, as determined by the permitted agent. 
(3)  Prevention of construction delays. If daily nesting surveys are not initiated by May 1, construction activities will be delayed no longer than five (5) working days to provide sufficient time for inspection by a permitted agent. 
(4)  Use of exclusion fences. A physical barrier used to prevent sea turtles from entering construction areas may be used as an exclusion fence, if permitted by DEP. Exclusion fences shall be monitored by DEP approved personnel and shall be repaired as necessary to prevent breaches. 
 Breaches which result in successful nesting within the excluded area shall be reported to a permitted agent of the DEP for appropriate action. 
(5)  Delineation of construction areas. Preliminary surveys, daily nesting surveys, and permitted exclusion fences shall encompass all areas seaward of the primary dune upon which construction activities occur and upon which equipment and materials are moved to and from the construction areas. 
(6)  Noninterference. Construction activities shall not interfere with sea turtle nesting, nests, or hatching activities; shall maximize preservation of native vegetation outside of the building footprint on the site; and shall maintain the natural existing beach profile and minimize interference with the natural beach dynamics and function. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 3, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-299. - Beachfront lighting. 
(a)  Intent. The general intent of this section is to prevent the direct, indirect or cumulative artificial illumination of the nesting zone from sunset to sunrise throughout the nesting/hatching season. Such illumination may inhibit nesting by adult female sea turtles and disorient hatchlings. 
(b)  Light sources. Both new and existing development shall ensure that point sources of light or any reflective surfaces illuminated by such point sources of light are not visible from the beach. 
(c)  New development. Single-family and multifamily dwellings, commercial and other structures constructed within the nesting zone, including parking lots and dune walkovers, and any outdoor lighting associated with construction or development within three hundred (300) feet of the nesting zone shall be in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Decorative lighting, including, but not limited to, floodlights and spotlights which are visible from the beach, or which illuminate surfaces that are visible from the beach, shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Wall or ceiling mounted light fixtures shall be shielded such that light sources do not illuminate the nesting zone, and such that the light source is not visible from the beach. 
(3)  Pole lighting shall be shielded in such a way that no light source illuminates the nesting zone. 
(4)  Low profile luminaries shall be utilized to illuminate beachfront parking areas, and these shall be positioned and shielded such that no light source illuminates the nesting zone. 
(5)  Dune crosswalks shall utilize low profile shielded luminaries only. 
All light fixtures on dune crosswalks must utilize low wattage (i.e. twenty-five (25) watts or less) bug lights. 
(6)  Lighting on balconies which is visible from the nesting zone shall be shielded such that lights will not illuminate the beach. 
(7)  Temporary security lights at construction sites in or within three hundred (300) feet of the nesting zone shall not be mounted more than eight (8) feet above the ground and shielded such that the lights will not illuminate the nesting zone. 
(8)  Tinted glass shall be installed on all windows facing the Gulf of Mexico. 
(d)  Existing development. Lighting from structures in existence as of May 1, 1990, located within the nesting zone shall be repositioned, modified, or replaced as necessary in order to comply with the following: 
(1)  Lights illuminating buildings or associated grounds for decorative purposes shall be turned off from sunset to sunrise during each night of the nesting season unless shielded or redirected such that they will not illuminate the nesting zone. Recreational lighting for tennis courts and other outdoor recreation shall be turned off when the court or field is not in use. 
(2)  Lights illuminating dune crosswalks or any areas oceanward of the dune line shall be turned off from sunset to sunrise during each night of the nesting season, or must be modified to conform with the requirements for new development (section 3-5-299). 
(3)  Security lighting shall be permitted throughout the night so long as low profile luminaries are used and shielded in such a way that these lights do not illuminate the beach. 
(4)  Interior light bulbs shall be shielded if situated such that they are visible from the beach. 
(5)  Window treatments are encouraged for windows facing the Gulf of Mexico to prevent interior lights from illuminating the nesting zone. The use of heavy draperies or window shades, or careful placement of lamps and other lights shall be utilized to reduce nighttime nesting zone illumination. 
(e)  Publicly owned lighting. Street lights and lighting at parks and other publicly owned beach access areas shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Street lights shall be located such that the bulk of their illumination will travel downward and away from the beach. These lights shall be equipped with shields that will prevent backlighting and render them invisible from the beach. 
(2)  Lighting at parks or other public access points shall be shielded so that the light source is not visible from the beach and does not directly or indirectly illuminate the nesting zone. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 4, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-300. - Design of vehicular circulation and parking areas. 
Parking lots and roadways within the nesting zone, including any paved or unpaved area upon which motorized vehicles will operate, shall be designed, positioned or modified such that vehicular headlights will not cast light on the nesting zone. The nesting zone must be shielded from vehicular lighting through the use of hedges, dune vegetation, or other ground-level barriers, so long as these are flush with the ground, continuous and maintained to a minimum height of four feet above the surface of the parking area and do not impede or entangle sea turtles or hatchlings or damage the beach or dune system. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 5, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-301. - Timing of beach-dune stabilization and restoration projects. 
Beach restoration and renourishment projects shall not be conducted during the nesting season unless daily surveys, and nest relocations as necessary, are provided by a permitted agent of the state. 
(Ord. No. 89-31, § 11, 5-8-89) 
Sec. 3-5-302. - Prohibition of activities disruptive to marine turtles. 
(a)  The following activities will be prohibited on the beach from sunset to sunrise during nesting season for the protection of nesting females, nests and hatchling marine turtles: 
(1)  The operation of all motorized vehicles, except emergency and law enforcement vehicles or those permitted on the beach for marine turtle conservation research, or as necessary for permitted beach restoration or renourishment activities. 
(2)  The building of campfires or bonfires. 
(3)  Any transient lighting which purposely and flagrantly illuminates a nesting zone, sea turtles, or hatchlings. This prohibition does not apply to individuals with appropriate permits from federal or state agencies. 
(b)  All temporary structures, including but not limited to beach chairs, umbrellas, cabanas, as well as personal watercraft, boats, or other vessels and items that have the potential for entrapment of marine turtles and which may interfere with the use of the natural beach environment for nesting habitat, must be removed from the nesting zone from sunset until sunrise when not in use, or stored in areas situated to minimize interference with sea turtles. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 6, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-303. - Penalties for violation; resort to other remedies. 
(a)  Florida Statutes section 370.021 provides that killing, molesting, or injuring a sea turtle shall be criminally prosecuted as follows: 
(1)  Upon a first conviction, by imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by both. 
(2)  On a second or subsequent conviction within twelve (12) months, by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months or by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(3)  An additional fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be levied for each taking, harvesting, or possession of a sea turtle. 
(b)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person or entity who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, as provided by law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Each sea turtle killed, injured, or molested shall constitute a separate violation. The county, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained herein, may take any other appropriate legal action including, but not limited to, injunctive action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 7, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-304. - Management coordination. 
The community development department shall be responsible for coordinating intra-and inter-governmental activities and for establishing administrative policies germane to the effective and timely implementation of the conditions set forth in this article. 
(1)  The community development department shall develop a process whereby any individual submitting a site plan or building plan for construction within the nesting zone is made aware of all instructions, requirements, and guidelines contained herein. 
(2)  The community development department shall develop, in consultation with DEP, a process whereby the community development department receives a copy of all permits granted by DEP for construction seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
(3)  The community development department shall develop, in consultation with law enforcement, community volunteers and others, an expeditious and structured process for enforcement. 
(4)  The community development department shall develop educational pamphlets and other materials such as signage to promote awareness of marine sea turtles. 
(5)  The county shall continue to support the efforts of the volunteer citizen turtle patrol in its conservation and monitoring efforts, shall encourage the development of public-private partnerships to provide funding for sea turtle awareness programs, and shall encourage the distribution of educational pamphlets and other materials to promote public awareness of sea turtles' use of the beaches during nesting season. 
(Ord. No. 98-041, § 8, 6-23-98) 
Secs. 3-5-305—3-5-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - SHORELINE PROTECTION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-35, adopted May 31, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 5—10 as Ch. 3-5, Art. XIII, §§ 3-5-316—3-5-321, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-5-316. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, all words or phrases used in this article shall be ascribed the meaning they have in common usage and which gives this article its most reasonable application. 
(a)  Beach shall mean the zone of unconsolidated material that is contiguous with the waters of the Gulf of Mexico and extends landward from mean low water to the place where there is a marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line of permanent vegetation (usually the effective limit of storm waves). 
(b)  Construction shall mean any activity intended to modify or improve site conditions, including but not limited to building, clearing, filling, excavating or grading, or the making of any material change in the size or use of any structure. 
(c)  Dune shall mean a mound or ridge of loose sediments lying landward of the beach or shore, which was deposited by natural or artificial processes, and which is of sufficient expanse and stability to absorb or moderate the destructive force of storm-generated ocean waves. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 5, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-5-317. - Standards. 
(a)  Beach and dune protection. 
(1)  Construction. All construction activity is prohibited seaward of the coastal construction control line unless permitted by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, per the requirements of Chapter 62B-33, Florida Administrative Code and F.S. Ch. 161. 
(2)  Operation of motorized vehicles. 
a.  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven vehicle upon the beach and dune system of any publicly owned lands without the written consent of the local government. It shall likewise be unlawful to operate motor-drawn vehicles upon privately owned beaches or dunes without the consent of the person or persons having lawful ownership thereof. 
b.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to emergency, law enforcement, and public lands management personnel while engaged in the performance of their duties, or as required in association with approved beach/dune restoration and renourishment projects. 
c.  Repealing sections 2-4-4 and 2-4-5 of the Charlotte County Code. Sections 2-4-4 and 2-4-5 of the Charlotte County Code are hereby repealed. 
(3)  Dune walkover structures. 
a.  Publicly owned lands. State-approved, elevated dune walkovers shall be constructed at specified public beach access points, following a study which identifies those access points most in need of such structures. 
b.  Privately owned lands. All new private development which fronts on the Gulf of Mexico, is separated from the Gulf by an intervening dune line, and is permitted for construction after the effective date of this article shall include a point of beach access that is served by a state-approved, elevate dune walkover structure. Single-family and duplex residential dwellings shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  Artificial (rigid) shoreline stabilization structures. The construction of artificial shoreline stabilization structures shall be prohibited along the Gulf of Mexico shoreline unless there is imminent danger of damage to or loss of a structure. All coastal hardening shall be consistent with chapter 62B-33, Florida Administrative Code, and F.S. Ch. 161, and permitted by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(5)  Dune restoration and stabilization projects. It is required that indigenous dune vegetation be utilized to increase the stability of restored dunes. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 6, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 98-042, § 1, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2016-020, § 1, 4-26-16) 
Sec. 3-5-318. - Interpretation. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing statutes, laws, ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions which impose more stringent restrictions on coastal construction or excavation. Where these regulations conflict with or overlap another ordinance or statute, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions on such construction and excavation shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 7, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 98-042, § 2, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-319. - Variances. 
A variance from the provisions of these regulations may be granted by the board of zoning appeals upon receipt of an application from an owner of shoreline property who demonstrates that unique or peculiar circumstances apply such that undue hardship will result from a literal interpretation and imposition of these provisions, the granting the variance will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege not enjoyed by others in similar circumstances, and the variance will not be injurious to others nor contrary to the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 8, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 98-042, § 3, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-320. - Enforcement. 
The primary means of enforcement of these regulations will be through review of construction plans submitted to the community development department. Approval will be withheld from projects which are in conflict with the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 9, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 98-042, § 4, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-321. - Penalties. 
(a)  Civil remedy. The county is hereby authorized to bring action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any violation of these regulations. 
(b)  Criminal penalty. Alternatively, violations of these regulations may be prosecuted pursuant to F.S. section 125.69. Each incident of violation will be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Code enforcement board. Alternatively, violation of the provisions and requirements of these regulations shall be a civil violation within the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 89-35, § 10, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 98-042, § 5, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-322—3-5-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-013, § 1, March 17, 2009, repealed the former Art. XIV, §§ 3-5-331—3-5-335, and enacted a new Art. XIV as set out herein. The former Art. XIV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 89-43, adopted June 22, 1989; Ord. No. 2003-036, adopted July 8, 2003; and Ord. No. 2006-102, adopted Nov. 28, 2006. 

Sec. 3-5-330. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Capacity means the availability of a public service or facility to accommodate users, according to the level of service expressed in an appropriate unit of measure as established for that service or capacity in the comprehensive plan. 
Capacity reservation means that capacity is reserved for the applicant for a period of time specified in the development order or site plan review approval letter. 
Certificate of concurrency (COC). A certificate issued with the final local development order which verifies public facility capacity is available to service a development. Staff reports may also constitute COC, if they are so stated. 
Concurrency service area (CSA). A geographic area in which the level of service is evaluated for concurrency purposes. 
Concurrency management system means the process of evaluating project impacts and facility capacities to ensure that levels of service are achieved and maintained during development. 
Development order. Means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for a development permit. 
Development permit. Includes any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of local government having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
Florida Inventory of School Houses (FISH). The report of the permanent capacity of existing public school facilities. The FISH capacity is the number of students that may be housed in a facility (school) at any given time based on a percentage of the total number of existing student stations and a designated size for each program. 
Impacted public facilities and services means public facilities and services with an adopted level of service associated with them. 
Level of service (LOS) means the level of service standards adopted by the board of county commissioners in the county comprehensive plan. These facilities include: 
(1)  Potable water; 
(2)  Wastewater; 
(3)  Solid waste; 
(4)  Parks and recreation; 
(5)  Drainage; 
(6)  Transportation; and 
(7)  Public schools. 
Material change. A change in land use or in the intensity of land use, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure, or in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, or the rearranging of building locations causing changes to available capacities along the site, or other changes determined by the concurrency manager or designee to warrant reevaluation of concurrency requirements. 
Proportionate share mitigation (public schools). An applicant improvement or contribution identified in a binding and enforceable agreement between the applicant, the school board and the county, providing compensation for the additional demand on public school facilities caused by the residential development of the property, as set forth in F.S. section 163.3180(13)(e). 
School Capacity Availability Determination Letter (SCADL). Based upon a school impact analysis (SIA), a letter prepared by school board staff, identifying if school capacity is available to serve a residential project, if capacity exists for each school type, and whether the proposed development is conceptually approved or vested. 
School board's five-year district facilities work program. School board's annual comprehensive capital planning document that includes long range planning for facility needs over a five-year, ten-year and 20-year planning horizon. The adopted school board's five-year district facilities work program and capital budget as authorized by F.S. section 1013.35. 
School impact analysis (SIA). A detailed report that evaluates a development plan for a proposed residential development and identifies the anticipated student impact from the development on the level of service standard within the concurrency service area for each school type. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-331. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to implement the concurrency provisions of the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan as mandated by F.S. Chapter 163, Part II, and Rule 9J-5 of the Florida Administrative Code. The concurrency management system provides the necessary regulations for the evaluation of development proposals to ensure that adequate public facilities and services are available concurrent with the impacts of that development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-332. - Policy. 
Charlotte County shall not issue a development order which results in a reduction in the level of service (LOS) for affected public facilities, infrastructure, or services below LOS standards set forth in the adopted comprehensive plan. Levels of service shall be maintained. Levels of service are summarized as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-333. - Vested rights. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or applied to result in a temporary or permanent taking of private property without due process of law and the payment of just compensation. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as affecting existing vested rights. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any person alleging vested rights to demonstrate affirmatively the requisites of vested rights. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-334. - Concurrency management responsibilities. 
(a)  Reviewing agencies. Concurrency management review shall be incorporated into existing development review procedures for efficiency. 
(1)  Reviewing agencies are responsible for ensuring that concurrency is maintained for the infrastructure they have responsibility over on both a project by project basis and over the capital improvement element schedule timeframe, which is at least five (5) years. 
(2)  Concurrency reviews are performed by the following: 

 
(b)  Growth management department. The growth management department is responsible for the overall coordination of the concurrency management system between agencies and for coordinating the annual update of the comprehensive plan capital improvements element (CIE). 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-335. - Minimum requirements for concurrency. 
For a development to be found in compliance with the concurrency management system, prior to final development approval, it must be established that LOS standards will be met for all impacted public facilities and services in accordance with the following conditions: 
(1)  Potable water, wastewater, solid waste and drainage. In order to obtain a development order the applicant shall show and the county must find that, at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent: 
a.  The necessary facilities and services will be in place and available to serve the new development; or 
b.  The necessary facilities and services are guaranteed to be in place and available to serve new development through the existence of an enforceable development agreement, such as one developed pursuant to F.S. section 163.3220, or an enforceable agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. Ch. 380. 
(2)  Parks and recreation facilities. In order to obtain a development order the applicant shall show and the county must find that, at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent: 
a.  The necessary facilities and services will be in place or under actual construction; or 
b.  A development order is issued subject to the condition that, at the time of the certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent, the acreage for the necessary facilities and services to serve the new development is dedicated or acquired by the local government, or funds in the amount of the developer's fair-share are committed; and that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than one (1) year after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent as provided in: 
1.  The county's adopted capital improvements element schedule; or 
2.  Through the existence of an enforceable development agreement, such as one developed pursuant to F.S. section 163.3220, or an enforceable agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. Ch. 380. 
(3)  Transportation facilities. In order to obtain a development order the applicant shall show and the county must find that, at the time of the issuance of a building permit or its functional equivalent: 
a.  The necessary facilities and services will be in place or under construction; or 
b.  A development order is issued subject to the conditions that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than three (3) years after issuance of a building permit or its functional equivalent as provided in: 
1.  The county's adopted capital improvements element schedule; or 
2.  Through the existence of an enforceable development agreement, such as one developed pursuant to F.S. section 163.3220, or an enforceable agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. Ch. 380. 
(4)  School district. In order to obtain a development order the applicant shall show and the reviewing agency must find that: 
a.  At the time a residential development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services will be place or under construction; or 
b.  A development order is issued subject to the conditions that the necessary facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than three (3) years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy or its functional equivalent. This may be accomplished through: 
1.  Unreserved capacity project scheduled in the five-year district facilities work program; or 
2.  If a capacity project does not exist in the five-year district facilities work program, the school board may add a capacity project to the program to satisfy the impact from a proposed residential development if it is funded through an applicant's proportionate share mitigation contribution or some other specified funding source; or 
c.  At the time the development order is issued, the necessary facilities and services (mitigation) are guaranteed in a binding and enforceable agreement with the public school and the county. Acceptable forms of mitigation may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Contribution of land or payment for land acquisition in conjunction with the provision of additional school capacity; or 
2.  Mitigation banking based on the construction of a public school facility in exchange for the right to sell capacity credits; or 
3.  Provision of additional student stations through the donation of buildings for use as a primary or alternative learning facility; or 
4.  Provision of additional student stations through the renovation of existing buildings for use as learning facilities; or 
5.  Construction or expansion of permanent student stations or core capacity; or 
6.  Construction of a public school facility in advance of the time set forth in the school board's five-year district facilities work program. 
d.  Residential development is considered exempt from the requirements of school concurrency by meeting one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  The residential development consists of single-family lots of record prior to the effective date of school concurrency. 
2.  The residential development that has a site plan, subdivision plan, preliminary or final plat or approval or the functional equivalent for a site specific development order approved prior to the effective date of school concurrency. 
3.  The residential development is an age-restricted community with no permanent residents under the age of eighteen (18). Exemption of an age restricted community must be subject to a restrictive covenant limiting the age of residents to eighteen (18) years and older. 
4.  The residential development, or the amendments to previously approved residential development, is calculated to generate less than one (1) student. 
5.  All new residential plats and site plans, or functional equivalents, or amendments to previously approved residential development orders are calculated to generate less than one (1) student. 
6.  Development that has been authorized as a development of regional impact pursuant to F.S. Ch. 380, as of July 1, 2005. 
Upon request by an applicant submitting any land development application with a residential component, school board staff shall issue a determination as to whether or not a development, lot or unit is exempt from the requirements of school concurrency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-336. - Concurrency certification. 
(a)  Concurrency review procedure All developments of regional impact (DRI) resulting in a development order and all projects submitted for site plan review shall be evaluated for compliance with the concurrency management system. Each department or district shall review the applications using the LOS standards stated in the comprehensive plan and shall record the findings in the appropriate county concurrency software tracking system. 
The findings shall be reported to the applicant in writing via a site plan review decision letter, official staff report, DRI development order, COC, or an officially designated concurrency certificate. Any of these may constitute the COC. 
The following are capacity review procedures to determine if public infrastructure will have sufficient capacity to serve a given proposed development: 
(1)  Potable water, wastewater, solid waste, parks and recreation, drainage and schools. The concurrency evaluation shall compare the available capacity to the demand of the proposed development. The available capacity shall be such that concurrency is maintained and shall be determined by adding together: 
a.  The total of the existing uncommitted excess capacity, if any; and 
b.  The total uncommitted future capacity of any proposed construction or expansion project scheduled in the currently adopted capital improvements element schedule, available at certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Transportation. The concurrency evaluation shall compare the impacted roadway segments LOS to the county established minimum LOS. Sufficient available capacity shall be developed based upon existing roads, plus any proposed improvements, listed in the currently adopted capital improvements element schedule to ensure that the minimum concurrency requirements are met. 
(3)  Schools. The concurrency evaluation shall compare school capacity within a concurrency service area (CSA), ensuring that sufficient capacity is available to meet the adopted level of service standard (LOS). 
If sufficient capacity does not exist, the school district in coordination with the county may consider proportionate share mitigation options to mitigate the impact from the development through the creation of additional school capacity. 
No site plan, subdivision plan, plat or the functional equivalent for a new residential development shall be approved unless: 
a.  The application is exempt from these requirements as provided in section 3-5-335, 
b.  A school capacity availability determination letter (SCADL) has been issued by school board staff to the county indicating that adequate school capacity exists within a CSA for each school type, or 
c.  An enforceable and binding agreement has been approved between the applicant, the school board and the county for proportionate share mitigation. Improvements contributed by an applicant shall receive school impact fee credit. If the proportionate share mitigation required is greater than the impact fees generated by the development, the difference between the applicant's proportionate share and the impact fee credit shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
The county may condition the approval of the application to ensure that necessary school facilities are in place, in order to validate or render effective the approval. This shall not limit the authority of the county to deny an application. 
Any application that is not exempt is subject to school concurrency and must prepare and submit a school impact analysis (SIA) to the county, for review by the school board staff. The SIA must indicate the location of the development, number of dwelling units and unit types (single-family, multi-family, apartments, etc.), a phasing schedule (if applicable), and age-restrictions for occupancy (if any). 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-337. - Concurrency determination and tracking. 
A concurrency determination shall be obtained from each department or district. where necessary, for larger projects, growth management may coordinate approvals. To promote accurate and up-to-date concurrency tracking, the project reviewer shall update his or her findings in the appropriate software system. Facility capacities shall be made available to the public and the development community on the Charlotte County website, including existing plus committed capacity measures. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-338. - Capacity reservation. 
(a)  Schools. Issuance of an SCADL by school board staff identifying that capacity exists within the adopted LOS indicates only that school facilities are currently available, and capacity will not be reserved for the applicant's proposed residential development until the county issues a certificate of concurrency. The COC indicates that the minimum requirements for all concurrency items have been provided for by written agreement or otherwise satisfied. 
(b)  All other facilities and services. DRI development concurrency certifications expire on the date specified in the development order or developers agreement. If this date is not given and for all other concurrency certificates the expiration date is two (2) calendar years after the date of approval, except for site plan review certificates, which expire after one (1) year, but may be renewed for up to one (1) additional year with an accepted plan time extension. 
(c)  Material change—All facilities and services. If conditions materially change in any project after a concurrency approval is granted, the project must once again undergo currency review. Upon expiration of a concurrency certificate, the department or district shall make the reserved capacity available to new projects. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-339. - Fee. 
(a)  The application will be accompanied by an application fee, which will include a capacity reservation fee. The amount of the fees shall be established by the board of county commissioners. Charlotte County Public Schools establishes its fees for school concurrency purposes. 
(b)  The fees are not refundable for any circumstances, including failing to meet concurrency and expiration of concurrency certification. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-340. - Appeals. 
(a)  Schools. A person may appeal a determination made as a part of the school concurrency process. 
(1)  A person substantially affected by the school board's adequate capacity determination made as a part of the school concurrency process may appeal such determination through the process provided in F.S. Ch. 120. 
(2)  A person substantially affected by a county decision made as a part of the school concurrency process may appeal such decision using the process identified in the county's regulations for appeal of development orders. This shall not apply to any decision subject to subsection (1) above. 
(b  All other facilities and infrastructure. A concurrency evaluation from any department or district resulting in denial may be appealed by the applicant to the board of county commissioners. 
(1)  A notice of appeal specifying the facts or circumstances shall be submitted by the applicant to the board of county commissioners within fifteen (15) days from the date of the written denial. 
(2)  The appeal shall be heard at a public hearing at the next regular meeting within thirty (30) days following the filing of a proper appeal. 
(3)  The growth management department shall transmit to the board of county commissioners all papers constituting the record of the concurrency evaluation. 
(4)  The board of county commissioners shall notify the applicant in writing of the date, time and location of the board of county commissioners meeting at which the appeal shall be heard. During the appeal proceeding, the applicant may appear in person or be represented by an agent or attorney. 
(5)  If deemed necessary by the board of county commissioners, in order to supplement the record, the board of county commissioners may receive additional testimony and make inquiry of the applicant and administrative staff. 
(6)  Applicants may be required to assume such reasonable costs as the board of county commissioners may determine by resolution in setting fees to be charged for appeals. 
(7)  The applicant shall have the burden of proof to establish by the presentation of substantial competent evidence to the board of county commissioners that: 
a.  There was a material error in the technical determination to deny the concurrency certificate; or 
b.  One (1) or more of the conditions in section 3-5-335 are satisfied such that the necessary public facilities and services will be available concurrent with the impacts of development. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 3-5-341. - Proportionate fair-share program. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish a method that allows continued development despite deficient roadways. This method involves the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, and is known as the proportionate fair-share program. The purpose of this program is to ensure that county's level of service standard is met. The program is consistent with F.S. section 163.3180(16), and shall apply to all developments in Charlotte County that have been notified of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation requirements. 
(b)  Findings. The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida, promotes a strong commitment to comprehensive facilities planning. The board finds and determines that transportation capacity is a commodity that has value to both the public and private sectors. 
(1)  The Charlotte County Proportionate Fair-Share Program: 
a.  Provides a process by which the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be addressed through the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors. 
b.  Allows developers to proceed with development, under certain conditions, despite the lack of roadway capacity, by contributing their proportionate fair-share of costs towards roadway improvements to ensure adequate public facilities. 
c.  Maximizes the use of public funds for adequate transportation facilities to serve future growth, and may in certain circumstances, allow the county to expedite transportation improvements by supplementing funds currently allocated for transportation improvements. 
d.  Supports the policies and objectives of the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an owner or developer from voluntarily making transportation improvements pursuant to a development agreement. Improvements shall be dedicated to and approved by the county, if by doing so sufficient additional capacity is created in accordance with the concurrency management system and the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  General requirements. 
(1)  Fair-share agreements. A fair-share agreement is a binding contract between the county and an owner or developer of land where the owner or developer is authorized to proceed with a proposed development even though there is insufficient roadway capacity. If the proposed development causes the level of service (LOS) to fall below the adopted minimum standard or increases/intensifies the p.m. peak hour trips on a deficient roadway as determined by the concurrency manager or designee, then traffic impacts may be mitigated through a fair-share agreement. Fair-share agreements will contain provision for authorized fair-share payment and/or improvements. Multi-party fair-share agreements may also be developed to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants for shared transportation facility improvements. All fair-share agreements will be recorded in public records. 
(2)  Eligibility. The county will accept a fair-share agreement for review if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  The proposal has failed concurrency review. 
c.  The capital improvements element (CIE) will provide transportation facilities that operate at the adopted LOS for the development upon completion of proposed transportation improvements. 
d.  The concurrency manager or designee has calculated the fair-share of costs required to provide transportation facilities that sustain the adopted LOS to serve the proposed development according to the methodology established in the concurrency management system. 
e.  The burdens and benefits of a fair-share agreement are binding upon all parties to the agreement and to their successors, in interest and assigns. 
(3)  Proportionate fair-share methods. There are three (3) methods that can be used through proportionate fair-share to ensure that a deficient roadway meets the adopted LOS standard: 
a.  Developer's fair-share agreement. 
b.  Multi-party fair-share agreement - An agreement between multiple developers along a deficient road segment. 
c.  County may initiate the improvement. 
(4)  Process. The following steps will be used in the application of proportionate fair-share: 
a.  If necessary road improvements are in the capital improvement program (CIP) the applicant simply makes a proportionate fair-share payment, in order to satisfy transportation concurrency. 
b.  In the event that the funds adopted in the CIP, in combination with the fair-share payment are insufficient to achieve concurrency on roadways associated with a project, the applicant may fund the balance of the costs for the needed improvements. If the balance of the costs needed for the improvements cannot be funded and the roadway cannot be made to meet concurrency, the project may not be able to proceed. The value of the road improvement would be based on an engineer's certified cost estimate provided by the applicant or another method approved by the county's public works director. 
c.  At the public works director's discretion, an alternative to paying proportionate fair-share would be having the developer make all the necessary authorized improvements to the roadway. These improvements would have to meet the county design standards and construction requirements. The applicant would have to demonstrate the financial ability to complete the project through performance bond. 
d.  An applicant may also satisfy transportation concurrency by contributing a roadway improvement that will create additional capacity on deficient segments even if the proposed development is not along a roadway identified within the five-year capital CIP. If the improvement and/or contribution is not reflected in the CIP but it is determined to be fully funded pursuant to F.S. section 163.3180(16)(b)(1), consistent with the comprehensive plan and in compliance with the provisions of this section, then it will be added in the next regularly scheduled update of the CIP. 
(5)  Performance bond. All developer improvements, including dedication of right-of-way authorized under this section, must be fully funded through a performance bond before the issuance of a building permit. The county shall have sole discretion selecting authorized improvements. 
(d)  Administration. The concurrency manager or designee shall be responsible for the administration of the proportionate fair-share ordinance. This responsibility includes conducting application review to ensure it complies with state and/or federal law, this section and the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan. The concurrency manager or designee presents the application to the board of county commissioners for approval. The concurrency manager or designee may approve fair-share agreements on behalf of the county for developments that generate less than two hundred fifty (250) average trips per day. He/she shall establish and maintain a tracking system to monitor agreements from beginning to end. Reports will be submitted on an annual basis to the BCC updating the progress on outstanding agreements. 
Once a fair-share agreement is approved the applicant has three (3) years to complete the road improvement for the project that is subject of the fair-share agreement or applicable phase thereof from the date the first building permit is issued. 
(1)  Default. The following events constitute a material default under the terms of the fair-share agreement: 
a.  Failure to make a fair-share payment in accordance with this section. 
b.  Failure to commence or complete authorized improvements in accordance with the fair-share agreement. 
If an applicant is found in default of the terms in the fair-share agreement then the agreement is null and void. 
(2)  Fair-share payments. Fair-share payments are due prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
If payment is submitted more than twelve (12) months from the date the agreement is signed, then the proportionate fair-share cost will be recalculated at the time of payment and adjusted accordingly. Additional proportionate fair-share payments may be required for any requested change in development project subsequent to the issuance of any building permit. 
(3)  Cancellation of fair-share agreement. An applicant may submit a request in writing to withdraw an application for a fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement. The application fee and the advertising costs paid to the county are not refundable. If a fair-share agreement is cancelled for any reason all development approvals in the fair-share agreement that have not been satisfied shall immediately expire. If the fair-share agreement is cancelled the developer may proceed with the portion of the project that meets transportation concurrency. Payment made pursuant to this section is non-refundable after the improvements are made. 
(e)  Application and review process. 
(1)  Application requirements. A pre-application meeting is required prior to submitting an application to enter into a fair-share agreement. The meeting shall be held to discuss eligibility, application submittal requirements, potential mitigation options and related issues. The application should include the following information: 
a.  Name, address and phone number of owner(s), developer and agent; 
b.  Property location, including parcel identification numbers; 
c.  Legal description and survey of property; 
d.  Project description, including type, intensity and amount of development; 
e.  Phasing schedule, if applicable; 
f.  Description of requested proportionate fair-share mitigation method(s); 
g.  Copy of concurrency review denial letter; 
h.  Site plan (site plan approved through site plan review for commercial developments over six thousand (6,000) square feet and/or residential developments that exceed six (6) units may be submitted); and 
i.  Submission of a traffic impact analysis. The analysis should include the following information: 
1.  The projected trip generation for the proposed development. Trip generation should be based on the average daily traffic of the proposed development. Trip generation rates shall be assessed by average annual basis and on peak hour and peak season activity. 
2.  The projected trip length and percent of new trips for the new proposal based on surveys of similar types of land use. 
(2)  Filing. The application, with fee, should be filed with growth management within ten (10) days after the pre-application meeting. The concurrency manager or designee shall review the application and certify that the application is sufficient and complete within ten (10) business days. No changes will be accepted once that application is deemed sufficient. If the application is deemed incomplete the applicant will be notified of the reasons in writing. The applicant will have thirty (30) days to submit a complete application. If the requested information is not received the application will be deemed abandoned. After the application is deemed sufficient, if the applicant submits new/different materials (see subsections b. through i.), the applicant will have to pay a new filing fee. 
(3)  Public hearing. Once an application is deemed sufficient, a proposed fair-share agreement will be drafted and the applicant will have an opportunity to review the draft agreement. The county will prepare a final proportionate fair-share agreement and deliver it to the applicant. Growth management will schedule a public hearing before the board of county commissioners to consider the fair-share agreement. The county will publish a public notice along with the regular agenda notice fifteen (15) days before the hearing. The notice shall describe the proposed development, the impacted deficient roadway, the applicable CIP scheduled improvement, and any authorized improvements. 
(4)  Review process. Residential development(s) that exceed six (6) units, new or expansion of existing commercial development, substantial change in use, or combination of all factors shall be reviewed by the concurrency manager or designee for compliance with the transportation requirements of the concurrency management system. 
(5)  Calculation of fair-share obligation. The fair-share obligation shall be calculated as follows: 
"The cumulative number of trips (DTV) from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during peak hours from the complete build out of a stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour maximum service volume (MSV) of roadways resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain the adopted LOS, multiplied by the construction cost (CC) at the time developer payment of the improvement is necessary to maintain the adopted LOS." 
Proportionate Fair-Share = (DTV/σMSV) * CC 
(6)  Impact radius. The zone of influence will be evaluated based upon project size with the impact radius varying depending on trip generation. A development generating two hundred fifty (250) to one thousand (1,000) trips per day will have an impact radius of one-half (½) mile. A development generating one thousand (1,000) trips or more per day will have an impact radius of one (1) mile. DRIs will be governed by the current DRI process. 
(7)  Update of traffic modeling analyses. The department of public works will update its traffic modeling analyses for use in the administration of the fair-share program periodically. 
(f)  Impact fee credit. 
(1)  Proportionate fair-share contributions should not be confused with transportation impact fees. Standard transportation impact fees are for impacts on the entire transportation system. Proportionate fair-share contributions are to address specific transportation concurrency issues (i.e. road segments operating below adopted level of service.) 
(2)  Proportionate fair-share contributions shall be applied as a credit against impact fees to the extent that all or a portion of the proportionate fair-share mitigation is used to address the same capital infrastructure improvements contemplated by the county's impact fee ordinance. 
(3)  Impact fee credits for proportionate fair-share payment will be determined by the public works director and/or the county engineer in conjunction with the zoning official when final site plan review approval is granted to a proposed development. If a developer, in lieu of making a proportionate fair-share payment, chooses to construct a county approved off-site road improvement(s), the value of which exceeds the amount of the fair-share payment, the development shall be entitled to road impact fee credits equal to the value of the improvements so constructed. 
(g)  Concurrency districts. The proportionate fair-share program establishes four (4) concurrency districts hereby created within the boundaries as shown on the concurrency district map (exhibit 1). The fair-share payments will be collected to assist in the funding of improvement projects on the deficient roadways impacted by the proposed development as identified in the concurrency districts. When the proposed development affects more than one (1) district the concurrency manager or designee in conjunction with public works will determine how the fair-share funds will be allocated among the affected districts. 
(h)  Appropriation of fair-share funds. The proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the Charlotte County CIE and CIP or as otherwise established in terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement. At the discretion of the board of county commissioners, the revenues may be used for operational improvements prior to construction of capacity projects. 
(Ord. No. 2009-013, § 2, 3-17-09) 
Secs. 3-5-342—3-5-345. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - SURFACE WATER AND WETLAND PROTECTION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-54, adopted June 22, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 5—10 as Ch. 3-5, Art. XV, §§ 3-5-346—3-5-351, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-5-346. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be ascribed a meaning which they have in common usage and which best meets the intent of this article to protect surface waters and wetlands. 
(a)  Altered surface waters: Natural surface water features which have been filled, excavated for navigation, had hydroperiods altered by drainage or flow diversion, are traversed by an elevated right of way which impedes flow, or which receive low-quality runoff from adjacent developments. 
(b)  Altered wetlands: Wetlands which have been filled, excavated, had hydroperiods altered by drainage or flow diversion, are traversed by an elevated right-of-way which impedes flow, or which receive low-quality runoff from adjacent developments. 
(c)  Buffer: That area adjacent to a wetland or surface water feature which is retained in a natural state and serves to minimize the adverse impacts of upland development on the wetland or surface water system. 
(d)  Marina: A watercraft harbor complex used primarily for boat moorage and/or storage, but which may also provide associated accessory facilities and services, including but not limited to the sale of fuel, lubricants, provisions and boats. 
(e)  Mitigation: Compensation required for the permitted destruction or alteration of natural surface waters and wetlands. 
(f)  Natural wetland: Those wetlands which have been unaltered by drainage, dredging, filling or invasion of exotic plants, to an extent sufficient to adversely affect the hydrologic and biologic functions of the system or reduce seasonal high water below their historic levels. 
(g)  Regulated activity: Any activity which may potentially have a significant impact when conducted within wetlands and/or surface waters, and which requires a permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER), Southwest Florida Water Management District (SWFWMD), South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD), Florida Department of Natural Resources (DNR), or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE). 
(h)  Relatively unaltered surface waters: Natural surface water features that, in spite of minor development activities, still function with hydroperiod, flow and water quality similar to the undeveloped condition. 
(i)  Wetland: Any area that is inundated by surface water or groundwater with a frequency sufficient to support, and under normal circumstance does or would support, a prevalence of vegetative species that require a saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and reproduction (per vegetative index rule in Chapter 17-4, Florida Administrative Code), e.g. swamps, sloughs, marshes, wet prairies and bayheads. 
(j)  Wetlands stormwater discharge facility: A stormwater discharge facility which incorporates wetlands into the stormwater management system to provide stormwater treatment. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 5, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-5-347. - Local, state and federal permits required. 
The requirements of this article shall in no case be interpreted to preempt the need for other relevant state, local and federal permits, including but not limited to COE and DER dredge and fill permits, surface water management permits, DNR submerged land leases, and mangrove trimming permits. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 6, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-5-348. - Standards. 
(a)  Development activities conducted within wetlands and natural surface waters. 
(1)  Generally. All regulated activities, as defined in section 3-5-346(g) of this article, shall be prohibited within the wetlands and surface waters of the county unless authorized by an appropriate and valid federally-issued or state-issued permit. All conditions and requirements of such permits shall be enforceable by the county, and violation of such conditions and requirements will constitute a violation of this article. 
(2)  Permitting standards and criteria. Permitting standards and criteria used by the federal or state regulatory agency issuing permits for construction in wetlands and surface waters are hereby adopted by the county. Administration of these standards and criteria for specific activities will be conducted by the agency issuing the permit(s). 
(3)  Additional permitting criteria and performance standards for development review committee consideration. 
a.  Hydrologic connections of natural flowways and sloughs shall be maintained during and after all development activities. In the event that proposed development activities will sever or interrupt a natural flow, the flow shall be collected and rerouted to the downslope/downstream portion of the flowway. 
b.  Discharge systems which discharge to wetlands and flowways where natural drainage is characterized by sheetflow shall be designed to promote continued sheetflow. 
c.  Predevelopment seasonal high water levels shall be maintained in wetlands. To the extent feasible and beneficial, historical seasonal high water levels and duration of inundation will be restored to altered wetlands. 
d.  Sediments which are suspended within the water column as a result of development activities conducted within wetlands and/or surface waters shall be contained by turbidity screens or other effective barriers until all such development activities have ceased. 
e.  Land application of treated sewage effluent by means of spray irrigation will not occur within seventy-five (75) feet of any state-designated class I or class II water body. Land application by percolation pond or rapid infiltration basin will not occur within five hundred (500) feet of any state-designated class I or class II water body. 
(4)  Mitigation requirements. 
a.  Compensatory wetland mitigation shall require that any area of wetlands created, enhanced or restored be large enough to assure that environmental benefits of wetlands destroyed or degraded will be completely and successfully replaced. In cases of mitigation for altered wetlands and surface waters, the ratio of replacement to destroyed wetlands or surface waters shall conform with federal or state permits issued for the project. Development is encouraged within altered natural drainage features to create new drainage works which, on balance, improves on the adverse effects of previous alterations. Mitigation for impacts to relatively unaltered surface waters shall be in compliance with federal and state permits issued for the project. 
b.  Exemptions. Isolated wetlands under one-half acre in size shall be exempt from the requirements of this article unless known to provide feeding or nesting habitat for a threatened or endangered species. 
(b)  Upland buffer zones. A naturally vegetated upland buffer zone shall be preserved along the perimeter of all wetlands and natural surface waters. The buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width as measured from the landward limit of the wetland or surface water. Buffer width can be contracted along portions of the wetland or surface water border, in response to site-specific development constraints, provided that it is expanded along other portions such that the minimum buffer width is maintained, on average. It shall be maintained in a completely natural state except for the minimum disturbance necessary to provide shoreline access to riparian property owners; the construction of utility line crossings, shoreline stabilization structures permitted by federal and state regulatory agencies; bridges, drainage conveyances and fences; and the removal of exotic vegetation. 
(c)  Dock construction in natural surface waters. 
(1)  Generally. Docking facilities in natural surface waters shall be designed to prevent or minimize impacts to grassbeds and other biologically productive bottom habitats. Overall design shall be consistent with the criteria of Chapter 18-20, Florida Administrative Code. 
(2)  Residential docking facilities. Dock length shall be sufficient to provide for a minimum water depth of minus three (-3) feet (mean low water) at all slips and mooring sites, unless it is demonstrated that a lesser depth will not result in impacts to sensitive bottom communities. Where in conflict with section 3-9-70 of the zoning regulations, this article supersedes, provided that an extended dock length is necessary to prevent impacts to grassbeds and other sensitive bottom habitats and will not pose a hazard to navigation. Turbidity screens shall be used during dock construction to contain sediments suspended within the water column as a result of the construction activity. 
(d)  Marina regulations. 
(1)  Adequate parking for vehicles and boat trailers shall be provided; and all parking, dry storage and non-water-dependent facilities shall be built on existing uplands. 
(2)  Expansion of existing marinas, and development of new marinas on disturbed sites with ready deep-water access, shall be considered preferable to marina development in more sensitive areas, e.g., grass beds, oyster reefs and areas where manatees are known to congregate. Marina development shall be avoided in such areas if at all possible. 
(3)  If marina construction will disturb highly productive natural systems, including seagrass beds and oyster reefs, then such marina shall provide water access to the general public. 
(4)  Use of dry storage facilities is encouraged in order to reduce water pollution and, in the case of marinas constructed in natural surface waters, to minimize the extent of disturbance to the water body. 
(5)  Wet slip marinas should not be located in class I waters or in class II conditionally approved shellfishing waters. 
(6)  Marinas which provide for overnight moorage of habitable vessels shall be required to have sewage pumpout facilities and shall document their usage. For the purposes of this article, a habitable vessel will be defined as any that offers on-board sanitation facilities. 
(7)  Fueling facilities associated with marinas shall be designed to contain land side spills, per the requirements of Chapter 17-61, Florida Administrative Code, and in addition shall be prepared to contain spills within surface waters. 
(8)  The design and construction of commercial marinas shall include catchment systems for filtering pollutants from stormwater runoff originating in boat yard repair and painting areas and bilge water drained at boat lifts and boat ramps. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 7, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-5-349. - Interpretation. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing statutes, laws, ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions which impose more stringent restrictions on the use and development of the wetlands and surface waters of the county. Where this article conflicts with or overlaps another ordinance or statute, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. With respect to required depths for docks, this article is considered more strict that applicable zoning regulations for docks. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 8, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-5-350. - Nonconforming uses. 
A regulated activity that was lawful before the passage of this article but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article may be continued subject to the following: 
(1)  No such activity shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in any manner which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  In any nonconforming use or activity is destroyed by man's activities or an act of God, to an extent equal to or exceeding fifty (50) percent of the size of the site or any structure, it shall not be resumed except in a manner which conforms with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 9, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-5-351. - Enforcement. 
The county administrator or his designee is vested with the authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and is authorized and directed to take legal action to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of the provisions of this article, including the following: 
(1)  Stop-work orders. Upon receiving written notice from the administrator, work being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, or shall be posted on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required to be given by the administrator. 
(2)  Civil remedy. The county is hereby authorized to bring actions in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain any violation of this article. 
(3)  Criminal penalty. Alternatively, violations of this article may be prosecuted pursuant to F.S. § 125.69. Each incident of violation will be considered a separate offense. 
(4)  Code enforcement board. Alternatively, violation of the provisions and requirements of this article shall be a civil violation within the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board. 
(Ord. No. 89-54, § 10, 6-22-89) 
Secs. 3-5-352—3-5-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - OPEN SPACE/HABITAT RESERVATION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-55, adopted June 22, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 5.00—10.00 as Ch. 3-5, Art. XVI, §§ 3-5-361—3-5-366, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-5-361. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give the most reasonable application. 
(a)  Open space/habitat reservation: The maintenance of a tract of land with a maximum length to width ratio of 6:1 at natural or predevelopment grade (elevation) with no substantial change in native plant communities or hydrological characteristics. 
(b)  Owner or owners: Those individuals, partnerships, corporations or public agencies holding fee simple title to real property. Owner or owners does not include individuals, partnerships, corporations or public agencies holding easements of less than fee simple interest (including leaseholds) of any nature. 
(c)  Parcel: Land holdings under common ownership or control which are part of a development plan. All lands used to calculate densities, manage stormwater before the point of discharge, or meet minimum dimensional requirements of the zoning regulations will be considered part of a parcel. A single-family homesite is parcel. 
(d)  Threatened or endangered animal: Any animal listed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as threatened or endangered, or by the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish Commission (Chapter 39-27.003,-.004 F.A.C.) as being threatened or endangered. 
(e)  Trust fund: The trust fund for open space/habitat created in section 3-5-365(a) of this article. 
(f)  Valuable habitat suitable for use by threatened or endangered animals: That land on which there is evidence of nesting, rearing or the continued presence of threatened or endangered animals or other lands as identified by the updated trust fund management plan as being suitable for the nesting, rearing or continued presence of threatened or endangered animals. 
(Ord. No. 89-55, § 5.00, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 98-043, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-362. - Applicability. 
The requirements of these regulations shall apply to all development activities in the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County which meet or exceed the thresholds established by Section 3-9-5.1 of the County Code. Developments which do not meet these thresholds or which are within an approved development of regional impact are not subject to section 3-5-363 of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-55, § 6.00, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 98-043, § 2, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-363. - Open space/habitat reservation requirement. 
(a)  All applicable development approved subsequent to the effective date of this section within the special surface water protection overlay district must include an open space/habitat reservation equal to twenty (20) percent of the total area of the parcel, except as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  All other applicable development approved subsequent to the effective date of this article must include an open space/habitat reservation equal to five (5) percent of the total area of the parcel, except as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(c)  Open space/habitat reservations must be maintained by the property owner in their natural state in perpetuity regardless of change of ownership. 
(d)  In the absence of valuable habitat suitable for use by threatened or endangered animals, the owner may satisfy the reservation requirement by contributing to the open space/habitat reservation trust fund three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each acre or fraction thereof in the parcel. 
(e)  The length to width ratio of open space/habitat reservation areas established pursuant to this section may not exceed six to one (6:1). 
(f)  The zoning official shall cause the Official Zoning Atlas of Charlotte County to be annotated to illustrate the approximate location of open space/habitat reservation areas created pursuant to this section. For purpose of reference, such annotation shall also include the date of establishment and the applicable petition or application numbers. 
(g)  For the purpose of calculating densities, the size of the parcel will include the open space/habitat reservation. 
(Ord. No. 89-55, § 7.00, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 98-043, § 3, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-364. - Nonbinding commitment to expand the funding base for trust fund. 
The open space/habitat reservation trust fund created in section 3-5-365 has as its only source of funds the money paid pursuant to section 3-5-363(d); however, the board of county commissioners may provide additional funding to the trust fund through such other legally available means and at such times as it finds appropriate. This stated intent shall not be construed to legally obligate the board of county commissioners to provide such additional funding. 
(Ord. No. 98-043, § 4, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-365. - Trust fund for open space/habitat acquisition. 
(a)  A trust fund for open space/habitat acquisition is hereby created to collect, hold and disburse: 
(1)  Funds collected in lieu of open space/habitat reservations on parcels to be developed; 
(2)  Other funds as may be allocated by the board of county commissioners for acquisition of threatened and endangered animal habitat. 
The trust fund will be administered by the county administrator or his designee. 
(b)  Acquisitions using moneys from the trust fund will be made by voluntary purchase from the property owner. The county will negotiate the purchase price of acquisitions, as provided by applicable Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 89-55, § 9.00, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 98-043, § 5, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 3-5-366. - Management of lands purchased with trust fund moneys. 
(a)  The county will manage open space/habitat lands purchased by the open space/habitat reservation trust fund to maintain the threatened or endangered animal for which it provides or is suitable to provide habitat. 
(b)  The county will not use lands purchased by the open space/habitat reservation trust fund for active, facility-based parks, nor will it make improvements to such land that would induce its use as such by neighboring residents or others. 
(c)  The county will manage these lands consistent with the requirements of the threatened or endangered animals being supported on the land and consistent with public safety requirements. 
(Ord. No. 89-55, § 10.00, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 98-043, § 6, 6-23-98) 
Secs. 3-5-367—3-5-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS PROTECTION[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-078, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 2006, repealed the former Art. XVII, §§ 3-5-376—3-5-383. The former Art. XVII created the environmental lands acquisition advisory council. See the Code Comparative Table for full derivation. 

Sec. 3-5-376. - Title. 
This article will be known as the Charlotte County Environmentally Sensitive Lands Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 1, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-377. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this ordinance will apply within the unincorporated and incorporated areas of Charlotte County, Florida, to the extent it does not conflict with any municipal ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 2, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-378. - Authority of this ordinance. 
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to F.S. Chapters 125 and 163, as amended, and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 3, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-379. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this ordinance are to establish an efficient, fair, scientifically valid, voluntary and economically sound procedure for the protection of environmentally sensitive lands. Environmentally sensitive lands shall include public parks and preserves currently in public ownership and those lands not currently in public ownership, which satisfy the ecological criteria set forth herein. This article shall not unreasonably impair the development rights of the landowner(s) or affect the fair market value of any property identified as environmentally sensitive. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 4, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 2020-013, § 1, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-5-380. - Definitions. 
Board: The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Conservation easement: A legal agreement a property owner undertakes to restrict in perpetuity the type and amount of development that may take place on his or her property. The easement spells out the rights the landowner retains and the restrictions on use of the property. Each of these rights and restrictions is negotiated between the landowner and the conservation organization or governmental agency holding the easement. A conservation easement may be tailored to the resources of the particular property and to the desires of the landowner. Conservation easements are more fully described in F.S. section 704.06, as amended. 
Cooperative management agreement: A mutually agreeable binding management plan between government agencies, local governments, groups, or private landowners outlining specific strategies for managing environmentally sensitive lands. 
County: Charlotte County, Florida. 
County staff: Any county employee whose expertise is deemed necessary to implement this ordinance. 
Due diligence: Investigation and review of real property prior to acquisition or protection, including, but not limited to, independently conducted appraisals, title searches and commitments, surveys, environmental site assessments, and any other items deemed necessary by county staff. 
Environmentally Sensitive Lands Oversight Committee: A committee appointed by the board, pursuant to this ordinance, consisting of seven (7) members charged with overseeing county staff's implementation of the ecological criteria contained in section 3-5-382 to identify environmentally sensitive lands; making recommendations to the board regarding the identification of environmentally sensitive lands; recommending techniques for protecting, preserving, and enhancing environmentally sensitive lands; and making recommendation to the board regarding the management and passive recreational use of environmentally sensitive lands. 
Environmentally sensitive lands: Those lands that have been determined by county staff, confirmed by the oversight committee and approved by the board as having natural features meeting criteria established in this ordinance. These criteria include rarity of species or habitats, connectedness, ecological quality, manageability, and importance to water resource protection, thereby warranting their protection in a natural state for the public interest. 
Property interest: A right, claim, or legal share in land such as lease, easement, fee title, water rights, mineral rights, and use reservation. 
Protection: The acquisition of some, or all, rights to real property for the express purpose of the stewardship and conservation of environmentally sensitive lands. Mechanisms include but are not limited to, fee title acquisition, conservation easements, covenants, leases, management agreements, tax incentives, rewards, transfer of development rights, exchanges, use reservations, acceptance of gifts of land, donations, retirement programs, fiscal incentive programs, and registry programs. 
Protection list: Those lands as determined by county staff, confirmed by the oversight committee and approved by the board that meet the ecological criteria established in section 3-5-382 and are owned by property owners who have provided consent as described in the protection procedures section (section 3-5-383) herein. Only sites from willing sellers will be on the protection list. Only sites on the protection list will be eligible for protection by the Conservation Charlotte Program. 
Related person: An individual who is related to a person as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, or half-sister. 
Site pool: Sites nominated by any individual or organization to be protected by the Conservation Charlotte Program. 
Tax incentives: A form of tax relief provided to an owner of land listed on the protection priority list, such as, but not limited to the reassessment of the value of a parcel upon which a conservation easement has been granted. 
Transfer of development units: A process that provides for the transfer of some, or all, of the development rights from a parcel of property to another parcel which can better accommodate such development in exchange for the perpetual protection of the original parcel. 
Use reservation: The acquisition of title to land with provisions that allow the present and existing extent of land uses, such as residency, agriculture, grazing or hunting to continue. Use reservations are typically associated with conservation easements. 
Work plan: A plan which sets forth the schedule of due diligence, prior to purchase, for the evaluation and protection of lands identified on the protection list, including the protection methods and strategies to achieve the protection. Works plans should include a biological description of the site, land management strategies and challenges, anticipated public use and land management costs. Lands will be managed in perpetuity for the purposes for which they were acquired, where land management practices will integrate the conservation of soil, air and water quality, wildlife and fish habitat, archeological and historic resources, aesthetics, and public access and enjoyment of county lands. The county's management priorities include ongoing natural resource monitoring and data collection; removal of non-native, invasive plant and animal species; conducting prescribed fires consistent with appropriate fire regimes; restoration or reforestation of native species, natural communities or hydrologic function; and provisions for appropriate public uses, situated to avoid or minimally impact the natural resources of county lands. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 5, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-381. - Environmentally sensitive lands oversight committee. 
There is hereby created an environmentally sensitive lands oversight committee (the "oversight committee") which shall serve as an advisory committee to the board on issues involving the acquisition, protection, management and use of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(1)  Membership. 
a.  The oversight committee members shall be appointed by the board and shall be comprised of seven (7) members who are residents and electors of Charlotte County and, if possible, shall appoint one (1) committee member from each county commission district. The board shall also appoint a member of the board to serve as liaison to the committee. County staff shall solicit members by advertising in the daily newspaper, on the county website and other appropriate means. The members of the oversight committee shall receive no compensation for the performance of their duties hereunder. The board determines that it is in the public interest to select and appoint members to the oversight committee which will give the board a composition of members from appropriate, diversified backgrounds of experience and expertise and hereby establishes the following criteria for the composition of the seven-member oversight committee. Each oversight committee member shall be appointed from one (1) of the following categories: 
1.  Two (2) members with expertise in business, real estate or land development; 
2.  Three (3) members with expertise relating to environment or in one of the natural sciences; and 
3.  Two (2) members representing civic, charitable or homeowners groups or recreational users of lands or other community interests. 
b.  Of the members first appointed, one (1) shall serve for one (1) year, three (3) for two (2) years, and the remainder for three (3) years and in each case until his or her successor is appointed and has qualified. Thereafter, the board shall appoint for terms of three (3) years each a member or members to succeed those whose terms expire. The board shall fill any vacancy for an unexpired term and all members of the oversight committee shall be eligible for reappointment. 
c.  Members of the oversight committee serve at the pleasure of the board and may be removed by the board, with or without cause, at any time, by majority vote of the board. Any member that misses three (3) meetings in a row or more than twenty-five (25) percent of meetings in any year shall be eligible for removal from the oversight committee by the board. 
(2)  Duties, powers, appointment, and regulation. The oversight committee shall annually elect one of its members as chair and one as vice chair who shall serve at the pleasure of the oversight committee county staff shall keep a record of the proceedings of the oversight committee, shall record each meeting with an electronic recording device, and shall be custodian of all books and records of the oversight committee. The oversight committee shall establish rules of procedure regarding the operation of the oversight committee as necessary to accomplish its purposes, subject to the authority of the board of county commissioners. County staff shall give public notice of oversight committee meetings as required by state law, keep the minutes of meetings and any actions of the oversight committee. The chair together with county staff shall periodically report on the activities of the oversight committee to the board of county commissioners. 
(3)  Responsibilities. The oversight committee shall have the following responsibilities: 
a.  Confirm that county staff's proposal for parcels designated to the protection list meet the criteria adopted herein. 
b.  Submit the proposed protection list to the board for approval. 
c.  Work with staff to develop a work plan for each protection list site. 
d.  Approve each work plan prior to it being forwarded to the board for approval. 
e.  Verify that all parcels protected by the Conservation Charlotte Program continue to meet the land evaluation criteria adopted herein at the time of protection. 
f.  Advise the board on the management, restoration and/or public use of each property protected. 
g.  Advise the board on the disposal of any real property pursuant to section 3-5-386 below. 
(4)  Voting requirements. A majority of the members of the oversight committee shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present shall be necessary for any action taken by the oversight committee. No vacancy in the membership of the oversight committee shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the oversight committee. 
(6)  Compliance with applicable laws. The oversight committee, its members, and all its proceedings shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of the Florida Sunshine Law, F.S. chapter 286, the Florida Public Records Law, F.S. chapter 119, and all other applicable local or state statutes, ordinances, or rules. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 6, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-382. - Environmentally sensitive lands identification criteria. 
There are hereby established five (5) criteria for identifying environmentally sensitive lands. All criteria are weighed equally and listed below in no order of importance: 
(1)  Rarity. This criterion incorporates the rarity of each of the site's community types, rarity of the species for which it provides habitat, and the uniqueness of the sites special features. 
Rank 
R1 Rare community type. Extraordinary example of a natural community. Diverse array of superb habitats, at least one of them scarce. Extensive old growth. Several rare species, including one or more classified as endangered or threatened by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) or the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FFWCC) or ranked as S1 or S2 by the Florida Natural Areas Inventory (FNAI) that are highly dependent on this site for the survival of the species. For these wildlife species, the site serves as an important breeding, resting or feeding area. For S1 or S2 plant species, a significant number of plants grow on the site. This site is significant not just for the county, but at the state regional or national level. 
R2 Examples of natural communities with high diversity of native species. Habitat types well represented statewide, but scare in Charlotte County. A few rare species, but not many ranked S2 by FNAI, and none higher. Unusual geological features or unusual species diversity. May have some limited old growth, but no large tracts. 
R3 Community types still represented by extensive acreage in the county. A few uncommon species, but no significant occurrences of anything ranked higher than S3 by FNAI or threatened on the USFWS or FFWCC lists. No major geological features or unusual diversity. No outstanding examples of natural communities. 
R4 Common community types in early successional or weedy condition. Habitat types widespread throughout the county. No rare animals or plants. No significant occurrences of anything ranked higher than Species of Special Concern by FFWCC or S4 by FNAI. 
(2)  Connectedness. This criteria concerns the relationship between the site and related elements of the landscape. 
Rank 
C1 Directly contiguous with large areas of protected natural habitat without significant barriers to dispersal along extensive boundaries or very large in and of itself. A critical link in a major natural corridor system. 
C2 Moderate in size and not broadly joined to large areas of protected natural habitat, but close or connected by significant existing or potentially restorable habitat corridors. 
C3 Moderate in size and isolated from other areas of natural habitats of significant size by marginal habitats (such as some agricultural areas). Narrow connecting corridors. 
C4 Small in size, isolated from natural habitats by significant expanse of non-functional habitat or some other barrier to dispersal. No significant connecting corridors. 
(3)  Quality. This is an index of the sites ecological quality and includes concepts such as richness, and ecosystem integrity. 
Rank: 
Q1 Excellent Quality. Current and past management practices have maintained site quality. The typical complement of species characteristic of the ecosystem is present and thriving. Minimal restoration is needed. 
Q2 Good Quality. Current and past management practices have basically maintained the typical complement of species; however some habitat degradation is evident. Many of the natural complement of species are present, but species requiring undisturbed systems are likely to be absent. Minor restoration is needed, such as controlled burning or removal of scattered exotic vegetation, but no major work is necessary. 
Q3 Fair Quality. Current and past management practices have altered the nature and quality of the natural communities present. Many of the natural complement of species may be present, but those species indicative of high-quality habitats are absent. Most of the site is restorable. However, the site may contain significant areas that need major restoration. 
Q4 Poor Quality. Seriously degraded. Site contains low species and natural community diversity. 
(4)  Manageability. Potential for long-term viability. 
Rank 
M1 Inherently well-buffered from most external impacts. Minimal problems related to neighboring land use and trespass. Needed management can be conducted with minimal impacts to neighbors or to the site itself. Fire management is both possible and relatively easy. 
M2 Reasonably well buffered from most external impacts. Neighboring land uses may pose constraints to fire management, but not eliminate it or make it inordinately expensive. Some trespass problems anticipated. 
M3 Not adequately buffered. Can be maintained, but innovative maintenance methods or expensive techniques will be required. The site will need significant exotic species control. 
M4 Too small and/or degraded for maintenance or the reestablishment of normal ecosystem processes. Site is highly vulnerable to external impacts. 
(5)  Water resources. Important to maintaining water quality in either a natural water course, groundwater recharge area or estuarine environment. 
Rank 
W1 Site is important to the maintenance of water quality in a major stream system, recharge area or estuarine environment. Alteration of the site will degrade the environment. The site contains a major portion of the drainage system for the feature in need of protection, forms a broad buffer between the aquatic feature and an incompatible land use, or acts significantly to purify water entering the aquatic environment. 
W2 Site is of moderate importance for the maintenance of water quality in a major stream system, recharge area or estuarine environment. The site acts to buffer the aquatic environment from some incompatible land use but does not otherwise contribute to water quality. 
W3 Site is of relatively low importance for the maintenance of water quality in the aquatic environment. 
W4 Site may be contributing to the degradation of the aquatic environment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 7, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-383. - Environmentally sensitive lands protection policies. 
(a)  Manner of protection: The county will protect environmentally sensitive lands in a manner that is consistent with the goals and objectives set forth in this ordinance and the policies of the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan. Uses of the environmentally sensitive lands protected pursuant to this ordinance will be limited to those activities that are ecologically benign, non-consumptive and resource-bases, except for those uses prescribed within the deeded use restrictions. Parcels purchased with environmentally sensitive lands ad valorem tax funds may be utilized to mitigate for environmental impacts associated with off-site construction projects, in accordance with section 3-5-386. 
(b)  Protection priorities: The county will restrict its protection efforts pursuant to this program to environmentally sensitive lands. environmentally sensitive lands are those lands that have been evaluated utilizing the ecological criteria specified in section 3-5-382 and approved for the protection list, as may be amended from time to time, by the oversight committee and the board. 
(c)  Protection methods: The county will protect environmentally sensitive lands pursuant to this ordinance only after obtaining voluntary approval of the landowner. Methods of protection will include but not be limited to, conservation easements, tax incentives, rewards, compensation, transfer of development rights, exchanges, use reservations, acceptance of gifts of land, donations, and fee-simple acquisition of property. 
(d)  Cooperation with other groups: The county will work in a cooperative manner with, but not limited to, the following entities in the protection of environmentally sensitive lands: 
(1)  Private landowners to develop cooperative management plans or in other manners that enhance native habitat(s) and/or public use. 
(2)  Municipalities. 
(3)  Private non-profit organizations and land trusts. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(5)  Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
(6)  South Florida Water Management District. 
(7)  Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. 
(8)  Florida Department of Community Affairs. 
(9)  Appropriate federal, state and local agencies. 
(10)  Charlotte County and the Conservation Charlotte Program shall cooperate, to the greatest extent possible with other public agencies that must mitigate for environmental impacts associated with construction projects. Where possible, such mitigation shall be sited to buffer environmentally sensitive lands, create environmental corridors, and aid in the protection of functioning environmental systems. However, mitigation for off-site construction projects may be sited on lands protected using funds from the environmentally sensitive lands ad valorem tax only in accordance with section 3-5-386. 
(e)  Matching funding source: When desirable matching fund opportunities exist, the county will follow and implement protection procedures for environmentally sensitive lands in accordance with the State of Florida's Florida Forever program, Save Our Rivers program, Florida Communities Trust program, and other matching fund programs to enhance opportunities for securing matching funding from these programs for protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(f)  County offices: The Charlotte County Natural Resources Division shall have primary responsibility for managing and implementing the Conservation Charlotte Program. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 8, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-384. - Environmentally sensitive lands procedures for protection. 
(a)  Procedure: The county's procedure for listing and protecting sites on the protection list will be as follows: 
(1)  Site pool: Natural resources division staff, using all available resources, will identify sites, including sites nominated by any individual or organization, and sites identified by the former ELAAC. There will be no ranking of the sites in the site pool; the sites will not be listed in order of importance. 
(2)  Eligibility: Natural resources division staff will apply the ecological selection criteria, adopted in section 3-5-382, to determine eligibility. The environmentally sensitive lands oversight committee will review the site pool and confirm that they site within the site pool meet the ecological selection criteria. 
(3)  Participation: County staff and/or contractors hired by the county will contact the owners of parcels within the site pool to introduce the protection program, determine their willingness to participate in the program and acquire approval if the landowner is a willing participant. 
(4)  Designation: Natural resources department staff will revise the pool sites to include only those lands for which willing participants exist, thereby comprising the proposed protection list, which the oversight committee will review for approval. Owner participation may be withdrawn or initiated at any time until a legal agreement for protection has been fully executed. 
(5)  Work plan: The oversight committee and county staff will develop a work plan for each site on the protection list. The work plan will include protection methods, strategy to achieve protection, funding sources and methods, land management strategies and costs and public access. The oversight committee will review the work plan for approval. 
(6)  Approval: The work plans and must be approved by the oversight committee and the board. All sites that have work plans that have been approved by the board shall comprise the protection list. Charlotte County shall restrict its efforts pursuant to the Conservation Charlotte Program to those sites on the protection list. Should the voters of Charlotte County approve the environmentally sensitive lands ad valorem tax on November 7, 2006, funds collected by the environmentally sensitive lands ad valorem tax shall only be used to protect parcels on the protection list. 
(7)  Implementation: Upon board approval, county staff will implement the work plans. 
(8)  Contractual negotiation: Contractual negotiation for lands identified on the protection priority list will not begin until: 
a.  A work plan has been completed and approved by the board. 
b.  Required funds are identified. 
(b)  Annual evaluation: The oversight committee and natural resources division staff will review and update the protection list at least annually. Owner willingness and conformance with the criteria will be the basis for changes to the lists. Any changes to the lists must be approved by oversight committee and the board, except for deletions at the landowner's request, which will be deleted immediately by natural resources division staff. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 9, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-385. - Use of protected lands. 
The properties which meet the criteria set forth in this ordinance that the county acquires legal title to pursuant to this program may serve multiple uses, provided that no use shall negatively impact the native species, habitats or ecological processes of the site. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 10, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-386. - Disposition of lands. 
In some cases the county may acquire legal title to a portion of a property which is not environmentally sensitive in order to protect a portion of that property that is environmentally sensitive. In this event, that land not considered environmentally sensitive may be utilized for stormwater retention, rights-of-way, recreation, buffering, mitigation and other public facilities, or declared surplus and offered for sale. In such cases where non-environmentally sensitive property is acquired by the Conservation Charlotte Program and is used for any other public purpose, that agency utilizing the non-environmentally sensitive property shall reimburse the Conservation Charlotte Program for the cost of that property as determined by the higher of two (2) independent appraisals. In no case shall such reimbursement be less than the Conservation Charlotte Program paid for that property. In such cases where property is deemed surplus and sold, that property will be sold for a price determined by the higher of two independent appraisals. In no case shall such property be sold for less than the original acquisition cost. All proceeds for the sale of such surplus property shall be deposited in the Conservation Charlotte Program fund. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 11, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-387. - Persons authorized to negotiate the purchase, sale or exchange of real property. 
(a)  The board shall by majority vote authorize the appropriate county staff member(s), or member(s) of any organization or agent employed by the county to negotiate for the purchase, sale, or exchange of real property, or real property interests, on behalf of the county, pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. 
(b)  No member of the board, or the oversight committee, shall directly negotiate for the purchase, sale, or exchange of real property, or real property interests, on behalf of the county, pursuant to the terms of this ordinance, unless authorized to do so by a majority vote of the board. 
(c)  Except to the extent required by Florida Statutes, no person acting on behalf of the county shall divulge information obtained in their official capacity with respect to any proposed purchase, sale or exchange of real property, or real property interests, pursuant to the terms of this ordinance. The provisions of F.S. section 125.355, shall be invoked by the county to maintain the confidentiality of appraisals, offer and counteroffers as allowed by that statute. 
(d)  Persons acting on behalf of the county during the period of active negotiations for real property, or real property interests, pursuant to the terms of this ordinance shall provide a written statement verifying that neither they, the entity which they are employed by or otherwise represent, or a related person has a financial interest in the proposed transaction and they acknowledge their agreement to maintain the confidentiality of information and documents as described in this ordinance. 
(e)  No contract or agreement negotiated pursuant to the terms of the ordinance for the purchase, sale, transfer or exchange of real property or real property interests shall be binding upon Charlotte County unless approved by a vote of a majority of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2006-077, § 12, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 3-5-388. - Rules relating to environmentally sensitive lands. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this article is to provide uniform requirements and procedures for public access and recreational use of certain environmentally sensitive lands. The objective of these regulations is to permit public use of certain environmental lands and waterways consistent with their protection and management, as set forth in the county comprehensive plan and various management plans, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any governmentally initiated or sponsored land management, educational, or public activity, or 
(2)  To the extent it conflicts with the provisions of any intergovernmental management agreement between the county and another governmental entity (including, but not limited to the South Florida Water Management District, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the Florida Communities Trust, and the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission) for the acquisition or management of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(c)  General provisions for public access to environmentally sensitive lands. 
(1)  Environmentally sensitive lands shall be open to the public for access on foot, except where otherwise restricted or otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Public access to environmentally sensitive lands shall be only at entry points designated by signs. 
(3)  Public access to environmentally sensitive lands, or portions thereof, may be restricted. The manner of which may include, but may not be limited to, restricting access to certain hours of the day, days of the week, or months of the year. 
(d)  Closure of, and restrictions of public access to, environmentally sensitive lands. 
(1)  Environmentally sensitive lands, or portions thereof, shall be closed, at the sole discretion of the county, to public access and use: 
a.  When such action is necessary to protect the water, natural or cultural resources of such lands. 
b.  During emergency conditions such as, but not limited to, floods, severe weather, wildfires, or other events or conditions that may present a danger to the public. 
c.  In areas undergoing construction, prescribed burning, restoration, or other land management activities where necessary to protect the site or where these activities may present a danger to the public. 
d.  During certain hours or for certain periods of time, when such closure is necessary to implement the land management requirements for such lands. 
e.  When necessary to conduct research, studies or data collection. 
f.  Pursuant to any agreements or permits. 
(2)  The county shall provide notice by signs when environmentally sensitive lands, or portions thereof, are closed for public access and use. 
(e)  Disposal or discharge of waste. The disposal or discharge of any waste, refuse, or trash outside of designated waste collection facilities is prohibited on all environmentally sensitive lands. The disposal of oil, gasoline or other hazardous substance is prohibited on all environmentally sensitive lands. Where no disposal facilities are provided, or where the containers provided are full, all refuse shall be carried away by the user and properly disposed of outside of the environmental land. 
(f)  Fire. 
(1)  No person shall ignite or attempt to ignite a fire, except for campfires made in approved areas and designated for such use. 
(2)  No person shall dispose of any burning matches, smoking materials or other inflammable materials except in designated receptacles. 
(g)  Removal, alteration, or destruction of archeological or historic sites. 
(1)  All archaeological and historic sites on environmentally sensitive lands are protected. Removal, alteration or destruction of archaeological or historic sites shall be conducted consistent with the appropriate state and county rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person discovering an archaeological or historic site on environmentally sensitive lands shall immediately notify the division of such discovery. 
(h)  Special use authorization procedures. Use of environmentally sensitive lands not specifically authorized by this article is prohibited unless granted a special use authorization, pursuant to procedures authorized by resolution of the board of county commissioners and not inconsistent with the intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2020-013, § 2, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-5-389. - Allowed uses. 
(a)  Hiking. Walking, running, jogging, and/or hiking is permitted only along trails or pathways or areas specifically designated for such use or uses and during posted hours. 
(b)  Horseback riding. Horseback riding is permitted only along trails or in areas specifically designated for such use. Horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained, and ridden with due care. Horses shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended and must be on a lead at all times. Horses may only be hitched to hitching posts clearly identified for such use. No horse-drawn carriages, carts or wagons shall be allowed or used within any environmentally sensitive land. 
(c)  Picnicking. Picnicking is permitted only in areas specifically designated for such use. The use of picnic facilities including tables, benches, and shelters, if available, is on a "first-come, first-served" basis. 
(d)  Camping. Camping is strictly prohibited at all times unless specifically permitted as set forth through a resolution of the board of county commissioners. 
(e)  Boating. Boating may be allowed on environmentally sensitive lands subject to the following: 
(1)  Boats shall not be operated in a manner that would damage any structure, plants, animals or other resources. 
(2)  Boating use shall be limited to areas indicated in the land management plan. 
(3)  Boating is permitted only in trails, channels or areas specifically designated for such use, and then only in accordance with all posted restrictions and safe boating rules and regulations. 
(4)  Boats shall be launched and recovered only from authorized areas as defined in the property's Land Management Plan. 
(5)  For the purposes of this section, the term "boating" includes motorboats, personal watercraft, sailboats, canoes and other recreational vessels. 
(f)  Motor vehicles; vehicles and transport using propulsion systems. Unless specifically authorized by a special use permit granted by the board of county commissioners or by permit issued by the community services department or its successor agency, vehicles or transport devices using internal combustion, electric (including solar) or any other non-human propulsion system, specifically including "e-bikes" or similar hybrid propulsion systems using motors or any other non-human propulsion systems, are prohibited, unless specifically authorized by the board of county commissioners or the community services department, or its successor agency, and designated by signage. The following exceptions are authorized pursuant to the terms of the subsections below. 
(1)  Where vehicles or transport necessary to provide access for mobility impaired persons; or 
(2)  An organized activity involving the use of motor vehicles otherwise excepted herein or if the board of county commissioners issues a special use permit. 
(3)  Motor vehicles licensed for highway use, and not otherwise prohibited under this section, may be operated on environmentally sensitive lands provided that: 
a.  Motor vehicles shall be operated by licensed drivers only on roads designated for motor vehicles licensed for highway use; and 
b.  Motor vehicles licensed for highway use may not be operated on paths or on, or in, any area not designated for use by such motor vehicles. 
c.  Said vehicles shall not exceed any posted speed limits. 
d.  In the absence of any posted speed limits, the speed limit on environmentally sensitive lands shall be ten (10) miles per hour; and 
e.  Said vehicles shall be parked only in designated parking areas or in such other areas as may be authorized by appropriate signage. 
(4)  "Swampbuggies" and similar vehicles are prohibited on all environmentally sensitive lands, unless such vehicles are (a) owned by Charlotte County and operated by Charlotte County employees; or, (b) authorized by the board of county commissioners; or, (c) authorized by the community services department, or its successor agency. 
(5)  Except as may be necessary to accommodate access by mobility impaired persons to an officially established amenity. Motor vehicles shall only be parked in designated areas. No person shall park any vehicle in a manner that obstructs a road, gate, or firelane/fireline. 
(6)  All persons shall observe and comply with posted traffic control devices and signs. 
(g)  Other uses. Such other uses, not inconsistent with the intent of this article, which may be permitted by the board of county commissioners through issuance of a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2009-029, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2020-013, § 3, 4-14-20; Ord. No. 2022-017, § 1, 4-12-22) 
Sec. 3-5-390. - Prohibited uses and items. 
(a)  Swimming is prohibited on all environmentally sensitive lands and water bodies. 
(b)  The use of bicycles or other similar human powered vehicles is prohibited unless authorized by the board of county commissioners or the community services department, or its successor agency, and designated by signage. 
(c)  The use of "e-bikes" or similar hybrid bicycles or vehicles, which employ any combination of human and other propulsion, whether internal combustion, electric (including solar) motors or any other non-human propulsion systems, is prohibited, unless specifically authorized by the board of county commissioners or the community services department, or its successor agency, and designated by signage. 
(d)  Hunting, trapping and commercial fishing is prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(e)  Smoking is prohibited on trails for safety, litter, and wildfire control, and other purposes. Smoking may be allowed in other designated areas by signage, however no person shall dispose of any burning matches, smoking materials or other inflammable materials except in designated receptacles. 
(f)  Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages within any environmentally sensitive land is prohibited. 
(g)  No person may introduce any plant or animal to the environmentally sensitive lands governed by this article. 
(h)  No person may remove, damage, destroy, or harass any animal or plant on environmentally sensitive lands, except for any fishing activity authorized by this article. 
(i)  Distributing any handbills or circulars, or posting, placing, or erecting any bills, notices, papers, signs or advertising devices or informational matter of any kind, excluding governmental notices, is prohibited on all environmentally sensitive lands. 
(j)  Unless otherwise permitted by law, pets, excluding horses accessing and utilizing trails designated for horseback riding, are prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands. 
(k)  Public nudity is prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands. 
(l)  Taking off or landing of private aircraft, including seaplanes, on environmentally sensitive lands is prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands. 
(m)  The use of metal detectors or other similar equipment is prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands, unless specifically authorized by the board of county commissioners by means of a special use permit. 
(n)  The disturbance or removal of earth is prohibited on environmentally sensitive lands. 
(Ord. No. 2009-029, § 1, 6-23-09; Ord. No. 2011-006, § 3, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 2020-013, § 4, 4-14-20; Ord. No. 2022-017, § 2, 4-12-22) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 28, 2015, repealed Art. XVIII, §§ 3-5-391—3-5-408, which pertained to landscaping and buffers and derived from Ord. No. 2009-017, § 1, adopted April 21, 2009; and Ord. No. 2014-032, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2014. 

Secs. 3-5-391—3-5-420. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - CHARLOTTE HARBOR TOWN LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 93-57, adopted Nov. 23, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—4 as Ch. 3-5, Art. XIX, §§ 3-5-421—3-5-424, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-5-421. - Establishment. 
The Charlotte Harbor Town Local Historic District is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 93-57, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 3-5-422. - Description of district. 
The location of Charlotte Harbor Town Local Historic District is described as that part of Charlotte Harbor Town located east of Willow Street, south of Edgewater Road, north of Charlotte Harbor and west of US 41 bounded by Harper Avenue to Pinnacle Street, Panacea Street, and Formanek Street and extending southeast to Charlotte Harbor and south to the Barron Collier Bridge (see attached map) located within Township 40 South, Range 22 East, Sections 25 and 36 of the Charlotte County Future Land Use Map. 
(Ord. No. 93-57, § 2, 11-23-93) 
Sec. 3-5-423. - Declaration of intent and purpose. 
The purpose of this regulation is to ensure the preservation of the historic and archaeologic heritage of Charlotte Harbor (Town), established in 1872, by designating it as a local historic district. 
(Ord. No. 93-57, § 3, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 3-5-424. - Relationship to the Smart Charlotte 2050 Comprehensive Plan. 
This ordinance implements the following goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan: 
Housing Element: HSG Objective 5.1; HSG Policies 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3 and 5.1.4. 
Future Land Use Element: FLU Objective 1.3; FLU Policies 1.3.1, 1.3.2 and 1.3.3. 
Recreation and Open Space Element: REC Objective 3.3; REC Policies 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.3.3; REC Objective 3.4; REC Policies 3.4.2, 3.4.3 and 3.4.4; Coastal Element: CST Objective 1.7; CST Policies 1.7.1 and 1.7.2. 
(Ord. No. 93-57, § 4, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 2013-013, § 1, 6-11-13) 
ARTICLE XX. - RESERVED[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-014, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 27, 2018, repealed Art. XX, §§ 3-5-425—3-5-435, which pertained to transfer of density units and derived from Ord. No. 2007-083, § 2, adopted Nov. 27, 2007. 

Secs. 3-5-425—3-5-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed Art. XXI, §§ 3-5-441—3-5-456, which pertained to excavations and derived from Ord. No. 94-49, §§ 1—16, adopted Nov. 1, 1994. 

Secs. 3-5-441—3-5-459. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - RESERVED[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-062, § 3, adopted Aug. 26, 2003, repealed Art. XXII, Landscape Buffers and Screening, substantive sections thereof being §§ 3-5-460—3-5-469, derived from Ord. No. 2001-331, § 3, adopted June 12, 2001. Provisions pertaining to similar subject matter are set forth as § 3-5-391 et seq. 

Secs. 3-5-460—3-5-469. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - EARTHMOVING[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2014, repealed the former Art. XXIII, §§ 3-5-470—3-5-496, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. XXIII pertained to excavation and earthmoving and derived from Ord. No. 2007-054, § 1, adopted July 17, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-091, §§ 2, 3, adopted Dec. 11, 2007; Ord. No. 2009-040, §§ 2, 3, 5, 6, adopted Sept. 15, 2009; Ord. No. 2010-026, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 20, 2010; and Ord. No. 2013-024, § 1, adopted July 23, 2013. 

Sec. 3-5-470. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to regulate existing and future earthmoving operations in such a manner as to minimize any direct, indirect and cumulative impacts detrimental to wildlife and its habitat, public and private infrastructure, groundwater and surface water, the public health, safety, and welfare, current and surrounding land uses, and property values as a result of such activities within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-471. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article apply to any person in the unincorporated areas of the county presently conducting or proposing to dig, mine, scrape, excavate, or in any manner conduct an activity that moves or removes earth from its existing location and moves it to another location, whether on the same or another lot. Compliance with the requirements of this article shall not relieve any party from complying with the requirements of any other applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(b)  Babcock Ranch Community Master Development of Regional Impact Master DRI Development Order is approved for a thirteen thousand six hundred thirty-acre community ("the DRI boundary"). The developer has obtained state and federal permits for a series of lakes to be constructed during the development of the community within the DRI boundary. Charlotte County shall issue permits and/or permit extensions for those lakes permitted by the state or federal agencies in accordance with the state and federal permits, provided that the fill from those lakes currently permitted under EarthSource Mine Permit #07-EX-16 or an extension or modification thereof may be removed from the DRI boundary, but those lakes not yet under a county earthmoving permit shall retain the fill material within the DRI boundary. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-472. - Earthmoving operations. 
All earthmoving operations are prohibited unless one (1) of the following conditions is met. 
(1)  The earthmoving operation is exempt per this article. 
(2)  A construction permit has been approved. 
(3)  A standard earthmoving permit has been approved. 
(4)  A specific earthmoving permit has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-473. - Application requirement. 
A  permit shall only be applied for by the owner of the property on which the activity will occur or by an entity granted permission by the owner of the property. Earthmoving permits shall run with the land. Standard earthmoving permits must be issued to the property owner or to the property owner and the owner's authorized agent; however, the property owner shall have an exclusive right to withdraw the permit at the owner's sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 1, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-474. - Staff review and action. 
County staff shall review earthmoving operations governed by this article for consistency with the comprehensive plan, this article, and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 2, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-475. - Nonconformities. 
An earthmoving operation that has been approved by the county, which has a valid permit on the effective date of this article, and which is made nonconforming by this article, may continue to operate in accordance with the regulations under which it was approved. Any request for a non-administrative modification shall require the operation to come into compliance with this article, the comprehensive plan, and the land development regulations. 
(a)  A request to renew a permit for a nonconforming operation may only be approved if all of the following conditions are met at the time of renewal: 
(1)  The operation is in compliance with the standards, requirements, and conditions of the permit. 
(2)  There are no changes to the operation. 
(3)  All local, state, and federal permits are valid. 
(4)  The operation is in compliance with any and all valid code enforcement orders of the code enforcement special magistrate. 
(5)  The operation is not subject to a stop work order as defined in this article. 
(b)  The operation shall comply with any new fees that have been adopted prior to the renewal date. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 3, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-476. - Exempt earthmoving operations. 
Notification to the county for earthmoving activities in association with the following operations shall not be required; however, such activities require other county permits: 
(a)  Grave digging. 
(b)  Well construction. 
(c)  Maintenance dredging of canals and stormwater ponds. Publicly-funded maintenance dredging shall not occur within fifteen (15) feet of a seawall or ten (10) feet of a piling support structure. 
(d)  Plowing, tilling and other similar soil alteration associated with the cultivation of crops for human or animal consumption, for renewable energy manufacture, or for silviculture operations. 
(e)  Flower gardening and landscaping when conducted on a lot containing a habitable dwelling unit as long as there are no adverse impacts on adjacent properties. 
(f)  Garden supply retailing or wholesaling. The stockpiling of loose soil, gravel, mulch, and other similar gardening materials that are accessory to the business. 
(g)  Construction of nonresidential farm buildings. 
(h)  Construction of public roads and associated stormwater infrastructure. 
(i)  Mini farm ponds. Excavations with a footprint less than or equal to three (3) acres and which will be used as a livestock watering pond, irrigation pond, or other bona fide agriculture use. Cumulative excavation on contiguous lots may not exceed ten (10) percent of the total acreage of the lot or contiguous lots. Cumulative excavation includes all excavation on the lot or contiguous lots but does not include ditches. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 4, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-477. - Operation standards; public nuisance; enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  General earthmoving operation standards. The following general standards of operation apply to all earthmoving operations: 
(1)  Hours of operation. 
a.  In the rural service area and in the urban service area of the Babcock ORI, an earthmoving operation located within two (2) miles of a dwelling unit in existence at the time of permitting, shall only conduct operations between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturday, unless otherwise approved by the earthmoving administrator. If there is no dwelling unit within two (2) miles, the hours of operation are not restricted. 
b.  In the urban service area, but not including the urban service area of the Babcock ORI, an earthmoving operation shall only conduct operations between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
c.  For excavations for agricultural purposes, the only restrictions to hours of operation are for trucks hauling material off-site. Truck traffic hours are restricted to 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
(2)  An earthmoving operation shall not have an adverse impact on the quality or quantity of groundwater or surface water of surrounding or downstream properties. 
(3)  An earthmoving operation shall not impede or destroy historic flowways. All historic flowways on the earthmoving operation-site shall be protected and, if necessary due to degradation, restored. 
(4)  An earthmoving operation shall not have an adverse impact on the one hundred-year floodplain. 
(5)  An earthmoving operation shall not impact off-site drainage. 
(6)  An earthmoving operation shall not have an adverse impact on environmentally sensitive habitat or any listed species either on-site or off-site. 
(7)  An earthmoving operation shall protect wetlands and other surface waterbodies. 
a.  There shall be a minimum setback of fifty (50) feet, or as approved by the state permit, vegetated with native species, from any activity associated with an earthmoving operation to: 
1.  Any on-site wetland, unless mitigation for its alteration or destruction is approved, and any on-site waterbody that is not integral to the earthmoving operation. 
2.  Any off-site wetlands or waterbodies. 
b.  No activity other than the removal of exotic invasive species shall take place within this setback. Depending on the duration and intensity of the activity, plantings of native vegetation may be required within the buffer. 
c.  Sediment barriers, fencing, and signage, as necessary depending on the activity, shall be placed along the outside edge of the fifty-foot setback as protection. 
(8)  An earthmoving operation shall minimize wind erosion of exposed soils. 
a.  Best management practices to reduce wind erosion shall be used. 
b.  All areas of one (1) acre or greater that will result in exposure of denuded soil during the months of November through March shall employ dust and other airborne debris control procedures. 
c.  All areas of one (1) acre or greater, except roads and other surfaces designed for vehicular circulation, which will be subject to erosion for a period longer than twelve (12) months prior to the establishment of finished grade, agricultural crops, or permanent perennial vegetative cover shall be stabilized thirty (30) days after creation. 
d.  Unpaved roads and other surfaces designed for vehicular circulation shall be treated during dry periods to reduce dust and other airborne debris emissions. 
e.  Stockpiles shall not be higher than fifty (50) feet and shall be treated as necessary to reduce dust and other airborne debris emissions. 
(9)  An earthmoving operation shall control water erosion and the effects of water erosion. 
a.  Best management practices to reduce water erosion and the effects of water erosion shall be used. 
b.  All slopes shall be stabilized. Stabilization may be done with a perennial grass cover and with native plants appropriate to the conditions of the site. Grass and native plant cover shall be required to extend down to the seasonal high groundwater line only. 
1.  Stabilization of excavation or fill operations is required to be completed when the final shaping of the slopes is done. 
2.  Stabilization of stockpiles is required if the stockpile will be in place for longer than six (6) months. 
3.  Stabilization of other slopes is required upon completion of the project. 
c.  All development sites shall be bordered by sediment barriers in order to filter any water leaving the site. 
d.  The toe of all exposed slopes not interior to an excavation operation shall be bordered by sediment barriers. 
e.  Barriers shall be placed and maintained such that drainage will not overflow or bypass the barrier. The effectiveness of the filtration shall be maintained by regular clearing of captured sediments or by refurbishment, as necessary. Captured sediments are to be disposed of on upland portions of the development site. 
f.  Barriers shall remain in place until the slope is leveled or the site is permanently stabilized. 
(10)  An earthmoving operation shall protect native topsoils to the greatest extent practicable. Any site which is identified by the Natural Resource Conservation Service as devoid of native topsoils shall be exempt from this requirement. Agriculture (Ag) excavations and commercial excavations are exempt from this requirement. 
a.  The topsoil that occurs on a lot prior to development shall be retained or stockpiled throughout the development of the lot such that it will not be lost during the removal of earth or placement of fill. 
b.  Following fill placement and prior to landscaping, stockpiled topsoils shall be redistributed over the exposed portions of the site. 
(11)  An earthmoving operation shall protect drainage easements. 
a.  Existing front and side swales shall not be filled or obstructed in any way, and the adjacent lot's drainage shall be maintained. Easements may be altered with agreement of the easement holder. 
b.  Vehicles and equipment shall not be moved onto any site unless it is over an acceptably constructed and approved crossover. 
c.  Earthmoving operations requiring access across county rights-of-way shall install a temporary pipe in the right-of-way as re quired by the county engineer. Temporary pipe must remain in place until permanent pipe is placed, if required, or the operation is completed. 
(12)  An earthmoving operation will require permits in accordance with Charlotte County law and applicable federal and state law for any burning or incineration. Burning or incineration permits shall be authorized for permits under subsections 3-5-479(f) and (g). 
(13)  An earthmoving operation site shall be safely secured against trespass. 
(14)  An earthmoving operation site permitted under subsections 3-5-479(f) or (g) may be required to be aesthetically enhanced with landscaped screening buffers or landscaped earthen berms if the property abuts a public road or residentially zoned property. 
(15)  Generators and pumps used during an earthmoving operation shall be well muffled and shall operate in accord with the manufacturer's specifications with all manufacturer's mufflers and noise reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition. Excessive noise from generators and pumps shall constitutes a public nuisance under this article and under chapter 2-5, article V. 
(b)  Excavation-specific operation standards. The following additional standards apply to excavation operations. 
(1)  The maximum depth of any excavation is two (2) feet above the confining layer. 
(2)  The finished slope of any excavation bank shall meet or exceed four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical. For agricultural excavations this slope is measured from top of bank to a depth no less than two (2) feet below the mean water table and for all other excavations this slope is measured from top of bank to a depth no less than five (5) feet below the mean water table. 
(3)  If stormwater will be discharged into an excavation, a stormwater plan must be approved by the county and/or applicable water management district, as required by applicable local, state or federal law or regulation. 
(4)  No solid or liquid waste shall be placed in an excavation except for clean debris in accordance with subsection 3-5-479(e). 
(5)  Dewatering operations shall not cause adverse impacts to drawdown of the groundwater table outside the excavation site and any excavation operations that result in detrimental fluctuations of water levels in adjacent water bodies, wetland areas or water supply wells shall be terminated until such time as a satisfactory plan is developed and implemented to maintain water levels in such areas. 
(6)  Blasting, drilling or hammering to fracture a rock surface, and similar activities, may be conducted only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturday if the permitted excavation is located within one (1) mile of any habitable dwelling unit or institutional use, unless otherwise approved in advance and in writing by the county. Trees and other buffering techniques may be required to mitigate noise impacts. 
(7)  The permit holder shall provide traffic safety improvements such as signage, striping, barrier rails, turn and/or acceleration lanes with tapers, all of which shall meet the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials' Standards and which shall comply with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as required by the county engineer. 
(8)  Haul routes. 
a.  To the greatest extent possible, internal haul routes shall not be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the lot boundary of the site, except at the lot exit and entry point. 
b.  An apron is required at the terminus of the internal haul route where it intersects the external haul route. Aprons shall be built to the specifications of the county engineer. 
c.  The use of haul routes shall not have undue impact on persons and properties along or in proximity to a haul route. An undue impact would be an increase in airborne debris beyond what is normally experienced without the earthmoving truck traffic, increased noise during the evening and night hours from truck traffic, or trucks that exceed speed limits or are otherwise determined to be operating in contradiction of the law. 
d.  It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to mitigate impacts arising from the use of haul routes. Required mitigation measures may include any or all of the following: 
1.  Watering and other dust control measures. 
2.  Cleanup of material overspills. 
3.  Maintenance grading of unpaved roads, shoulder grading and restoration. 
4.  Pavement maintenance, including resurfacing, reconstruction, and patching. 
5.  Safety improvements such as striping barrier rails, turn and acceleration lanes. 
e.  If a privately maintained right-of-way is used to gain access to an operation site, the applicant shall supply an affidavit indicating that they have legal use of that right-of-way for a haul route. 
(c)  The general and excavation-specific operation standards contained in this section, if violated, constitute dangers to the public health, safety and/or welfare of county residents and visitors; therefore, such violations are deemed to be public nuisances under this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section, any lawful rules and regulations promulgated under this section, any lawful order issued by the county or its designees, or any permit condition, limitation or restriction. It shall be the duty of all county officials and employees to enforce the provisions of this section. No permit shall be issued for the installation of any improvements or facilities governed by the provisions of this Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, unless the operation is in compliance with this section. In addition to any other remedies provided by this article, the county shall have the following judicial remedies available for violations of this section, any lawful rule or regulation promulgated under this section, any lawful order of the county or its designee, or any permit condition, limitation or restriction: 
(1)  Deliver a written warning to the permit holder and lot or property owner describing the violation(s) and granting three (3) days to the violator to bring the operation into compliance. 
(2)  Issue a stop work order for no more than ninety (90) days. The stop work order may be issued for a failure to comply with a written warning or for any violation of this article. 
(3)  Rescind a permit if a permit holder violates a stop work order. 
(4)  Institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to establish liability and to recover damages for any injury to the air, waters, or property, including animal, plant, and aquatic life, within the county's geographical limits. 
(5)  Institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to impose and recover a civil penalty for each violation in an amount of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per offense. However, the court may receive evidence in mitigation. Each day during any portion of which such violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
(6)  Institute a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek injunctive relief to enforce compliance with or prohibit the violation of this article, any lawful rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter, any lawful county rule or regulation promulgated under this section, or any permit condition, limitation or restriction; and to seek injunctive relief to prevent injury to the air, waters, and property, including animal, plant, and aquatic life within the county's geographical limits, and to protect human health, safety, and welfare caused or threatened by any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 5, 2-23-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-004, § 5, adopted Feb. 23, 2021 amended § 3-5-477 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Operation standards" to "Operation standards; public nuisance; enforcement and remedies," as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-5-478. - Standard earthmoving and construction permits. 
The following activities shall require county review and approval prior to the commencement of any earthmoving activity; however, review and approval by the earthmoving administrator is not required. No earthmoving activity shall occur on-site prior to the approval of any required permit. [For a development of regional impact, the development site shall mean any of the area within the DRI boundary.] Stockpiling is considered an accessory to these earthmoving activities but shall only be allowed for material used on the development site and shall cease when there is no longer a valid permit for the site. 
(a)  Standard earthmoving permits. The following activities require a standard earthmoving permit. 
(1)  Earthmoving associated with subdivisions, multifamily, commercial, and industrial site development which includes approval of earthmoving activities that occur prior to approval of a construction permit or final plat, such as site grading, stormwater and other utility installation, and road construction. The review process will occur simultaneously with the site plan review process. The applicant shall receive the approved standard earthmoving permit upon final site plan approval. Earthmoving in association with construction of a building on the development site may be otherwise reviewed and approved through the construction permit process. 
(2)  Earthmoving for small farm pond construction is an excavation that is larger than three (3) acres but less than or equal to fifteen (15) acres and which will be used as a livestock watering pond, aquaculture pond, irrigation pond, or similar bona fide agriculture use. Cumulative excavations on contiguous lots may not exceed ten (10) percent of the total acreage of the lot or contiguous lots. Cumulative excavation includes all excavation on the lot or contiguous lots but does not include ditches. Small farm pond construction shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Location. 
1.  Lots located in the rural service area shall have one (1) or more of the following zoning and future land use map (FLUM) designations: 
(i)  Zoned agriculture general with agriculture FLUM designation. 
(ii)  Zoned excavation and mining with a mineral resource extraction FLUM designation. 
(iii)  Zoned planned development with a rural community mixed use FLUM designation. 
2.  Lots located in the urban service area shall have zoning and FLUM designations that allow agriculture or a vested, bona fide agriculture use. 
b.  Earthmoving and its ancillary uses and operations shall only occur on uplands. 
c.  No excavated material shall be placed in a floodplain. 
d.  All excavated material shall be retained on-site. The applicant shall describe and, if appropriate, illustrate how the material will be permanently disposed. Removal of excavated material from the site requires a permit under section 4-5-79(f). 
e.  The depth of the excavation shall not exceed two (2) feet above confining layer; all operations proposing a depth below twelve (12) feet shall comply with the soil boring requirements of this article. 
(3)  Earthmoving to create residential ponds shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The lot shall contain a habitable dwelling unit on land zoned for residential use. 
b.  Design requirements. 
1.  The maximum excavation shall be equal to or less than ten (10) percent of the lot or one (1) acre, whichever is less, inclusive of all excavations on-site but not including ditches or swales. 
2.  The depth shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
3.  There shall be a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from top of bank to any lot line, easement, or structure. 
(4)  Earthmoving to create tracks and trails used by off-road vehicles, motorbikes, bicycles and other similar vehicles. 
(5)  Earthmoving to raise a portion of a lot containing one (1) habitable dwelling unit to no more than one (1) foot above natural grade. 
(6)  Earthmoving to develop active and passive parks, such as playgrounds, ball courts and fields, trails, including required parking. 
(7)  Stockpiling of dredge spoils. Dredge spoil may be stored on vacant or developed residential, commercial, or industrial lots only if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The storage occurs no longer than one (1) year. 
b.  The spoil pile is located no closer than twenty (20) feet to any buildings. 
c.  The spoil pile shall be stabilized to prevent the migration of dust and other airborne debris. Dust and airborne debris constitute public nuisances under this article. 
d.  Native plant or animal species, except grasses, shall not be removed or harmed to accommodate the storage of dredge spoils. A listed species survey, for flora and fauna, and identification of the FLUCCS category of the proposed spoil site are required. 
e.  The areas used for stockpiling shall be reclaimed by plantings with native groundcover, shrubs, and trees, or proof provided in the form of an approved construction permit that the site will be developed with a legal use after the stockpile has been removed. If the site is not to be developed with a use, the site shall be planted so that no less than twenty (20) percent of the area used for the stockpiling activity is covered with native trees and shrubs; the remainder shall be seeded with native grasses or other native plants. 
(b)  Construction permits. The following individual activities do not require a separate application for an earthmoving permit but will be permitted in accordance with otherwise applicable county regulations: the installation of irrigation pipe, commercial landscaping, slabs, driveways, seawall construction, construction or destruction of pools and buildings including standard building permits, tree removal and such other similar development activities. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 6, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-479. - Specific earthmoving permits. 
The following require review and approval by the earthmoving administrator. No earthmoving activity shall occur on-site prior to the approval of a permit. 
(a)  Lake reconfiguration. Reconfiguring an existing lake, including increasing its size or depth. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  Excavated material to be removed from the site may not exceed ten (10) percent of the total amount of cubic yards to be excavated. The total amount of excavated material may not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) cubic yards. 
(2)  The minimum setback from top of bank to any lot line, easement, or structure shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Increasing the width of an existing canal or dredging a new canal. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  Excavated material to be removed from a new canal site may not exceed ten (10) percent of the total amount of cubic yards to be excavated. The total amount of excavated material may not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) cubic yards. 
(2)  A canal top-of-bank line may extend to the limits of the easement, right-of-way, or to adjacent lot lines. 
(c)  Raising lot elevation (RLE). Increasing the elevation of a portion of a lot by more than one (1) foot above natural grade includes the aggregated elevation of any previous filling operations. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  The lot shall contain a habitable dwelling unit on land zoned for residential use. 
(2)  Stockpiles shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any lot line or easement. 
(3)  All areas shall be seeded, sodded, or planted with native vegetation or other landscaping immediately after grading is completed. 
(d)  "Stockpiling" is storing excavated material on a lot which is not otherwise permitted for an earthmoving operation or construction operation. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  Stockpiling as a principal use shall only occur on a lot or lots with the following zoning and land use designations: IL with a low intensity industrial FLUM designation; IG with a heavy industrial FLUM designation; EM with a mineral resource extraction FLUM designation; or, AG with an agriculture FLUM designation. 
(2)  Stockpiling is not permitted within fifty (50) feet of a lot line or easement, within two hundred (200) feet of a habitable dwelling unit or institutional use, or within (50) feet of an agricultural or industrial structure. 
(3)  All areas used for stockpiling shall be reclaimed by plantings with native groundcover, shrubs, and trees, or proof provided in the form of an approved construction permit that the site will be developed with a legal use after the stockpile has been removed. If the site is not to be developed with a use, the site shall be planted so that at least 20 percent of the area used for the stockpiling is planted with native trees and shrubs; the remainder shall be seeded with native grasses or other native plants. 
(e)  Filling an excavated area with clean fill. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  Only clean debris as defined in 62-701.200 F.A.C., as may be amended or promulgated from time to time, and clean gravel, sand, rock, and clay may be placed within an excavation. 
(2)  Clean debris shall only be placed to within ten (10) feet of the proposed finished elevation of the site. The remaining ten (10) feet to the proposed finished elevation shall be filled with soil. 
(3)  The type, tonnage and origin of the clean debris shall be reported on a quarterly basis to the earthmoving administrator. 
(4)  All filled areas shall be reclaimed by plantings with native groundcover, shrubs, and trees, or proof provided in the form of an approved construction permit that the site will be developed with a legal use after the filling has been completed. If the site is not to be developed with a use, the site shall be planted so that at least twenty (20) percent of the area used for the stockpiling activity is planted with native trees and shrubs; the remainder may be seeded with native grasses or other native plants. 
(f)  "Ag excavation" is an excavation of a site for water storage in conjunction with bona fide agricultural purposes. The total area to be excavated is greater than fifteen (15) acres. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  The lot or lots shall be located in the rural service area and: 
a.  Zoned AG with an agriculture FLUM designation. 
b.  Zoned PD with a rural community mixed use FLUM designation. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide written evidence showing that the excavation of material and water storage for a bona fide agricultural purpose has received approval from any required state or federal agency. Alternatively, the applicant shall provide a copy of the application for a permit from a required state or federal agency, including evidence that the application has been submitted and is under review. The county may deny a permit if a required state or federal agency has not approved the excavation of material and water storage for a bona fide agricultural purpose on the applicant's site. The applicant may submit written evidence showing that the excavation of material will reduce the amount of ground water required for the agricultural purpose. If such evidence is found to be sufficient, the county may issue the permit upon a finding that such excavation is beneficial to the health, safety and welfare of county residents and visitors. 
(3)  If excavated material is to be removed from the excavation site, the permit shall include a condition that the operation must comply with sections 3-5-482, 3-5-490 and 3-5-491. 
(4)  Design requirements. 
a.  Cumulative acres of excavation on-site, excluding ditches, may not exceed ten (10) percent of the total acreage of crops to be irrigated. The owner or owners of the crop land to be irrigated must join the application and shall be named as beneficiaries of the permit. Crop land to be irrigated may join only one (1) permit during the useful life of the water storage site. 
b.  The minimum setbacks shall be as follows: twenty-five (25) feet from top of bank to any nonresidential zoning district; one thousand (1,000) feet to any residential zoning district; and, one thousand (1,000) feet to any habitable dwelling unit or institutional structure unless the occupants and owners, if not the same, of the affected structures consent to a reduced setback. 
(g)  A "commercial excavation" supplies material for construction sites, such as for roadbeds or building pads. The following requirements apply: 
(1)  The lot or lots shall be located in the rural service area and zoned excavation and mining with a mineral resource extraction FLUM designation. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet from top-of-bank to any nonresidential zoning district, one thousand (1,000) feet to any residential zoning district, and one thousand (1,000) feet to any habitable dwelling unit or institutional structure unless the occupants and owners, if not the same, of the affected structures consent to a reduced setback. 
(3)  Uses that are considered accessory to a commercial excavation are asphalt and concrete plants. These uses must be requested and identified within the earthmoving application and allowed while the earthmoving permit is valid and in force. 
(4)  Vegetative reclamation of a commercial excavation site requires the following: 
a.  At least forty (40) percent of the littoral zone of the reclaimed shoreline of the excavated area shall be planted with aquatic vegetation. An additional fifteen (15) percent of the reclaimed shoreline shall be shaped into a littoral shelf extending no less than fifteen (15) feet into the excavated area and designed to have less than twenty-four (24) to twenty (20) inches of water during normal water level periods. The littoral zone and shelf shall be planted with a mixture of native emergent, floating, and submerged plant species of at least three (3) different species. At installation, the plants shall cover at least eighty-five (85) percent of the areas designated for planting. 
b.  An upland planting area is required along the reclaimed perimeter of the excavation footprint. The upland planting area shall utilize the following standards: 
1.  Required plant units per one hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the excavated area shall be three (3) canopy trees, one (1) accent/understory tree and five (5) shrubs. 
2.  The upland planting area shall be a minimum width of twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Canopy trees for use within the buffer include: 

 
4.  Understory trees for use within the buffer include: 

 
5.  Shrubs for use within the buffer include: 

 
6.  Trees shall be separated by a distance of no greater than fifty (50) feet. 
7.  Other indigenous species may be approved by the county for use in the upland planting area. 
8.  Clustering of vegetation may be allowed on a case-by-case basis. 
9.  All planted material shall be Florida #1 grade according to Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Grades and Standards, as amended or promulgated from time to time by it or its successor agency; trees shall be minimum three-gallon size; shrubs shall be minimum one (1) gallon size, and minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 7, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-480. - Earthmoving operations not identified by this article. 
Any operation not identified in this article shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the earthmoving administrator and will be assigned to an appropriate category. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-481. - Specific earthmoving permit application requirements. 
(a)  Information required in an application. An application for a specific earthmoving permit shall include, at a minimum, the items checked below. The application shall be deemed complete if all of the checked information is included in the application. Other information may be required by the earthmoving administrator upon sufficiency review of the application. The county will accept the same application information that an applicant submits to a state or federal agency, or an approved permit, if the applicant chooses to use that information to prove that the operation will meet the standards and requirements of this article. 

 
(b)  Project narrative. A project narrative shall include the following information: 
(1)  Description of all activity that will take place on-site. 
(2)  Type and amount of material to be moved, removed, or stored. 
(3)  Schedule. 
(4)  Property owner's affidavit of responsibility for the site and the excavation. 
(5)  Copies of instruments providing for perpetual maintenance of any common or dedicated open space, easements, dedications and reservations. 
(6)  Erosion control measures. 
(7)  Noise control measures. 
(8)  Description of how the site will be secured. 
(c)  Excavation plans. 
(1)  Excavation plans shall include the following information: 
a.  Ownership and boundary lines, including bearings and distances superimposed over an aerial photo. Out-parcels within the site shall be clearly indicated along with access to these outparcels. 
b.  Size, shape, depth and location of the proposed excavation, including recharge trenches and settling ponds. 
c.  Locations of all proposed spoil piles and stockpiles of excavated material. 
d.  Within the site and within one-half (½) mile of the site identify rights-of-way, easements, and lot ownership; natural physical features such as flowways; the one hundred-year floodplain; wetlands, lakes and critical wildlife habitat; manmade features such as utility lines, wells, septic systems, storage tanks, drainage ditches, houses, and barns. Provide the distance from the site and the excavation boundaries to these features. 
e.  Show access roads into the site. Internal haul routes shall be identified along with roadway specifications, drainage requirements and signage locations and type. Identify maintenance measures. 
f.  If material is to be hauled off-site, identify all possible external haul routes within a one-mile radius and whether these routes are publicly or privately maintained. Show clear line of site distances at entranceway from internal haul route to external haul route. Show what improvements are necessary to haul routes. 
g.  Topographic survey showing existing and proposed grades related to NGVD. 
h.  Proposed slopes during excavation, include cross-sectional drawings referring to NGVD showing the proposed depth(s) of excavation, slope of the side and depth of water. 
i.  Detailed erosion control methods. 
(2)  Excavation plans shall include the following if required by proposed excavation conditions: 
a.  Phases of the excavation. 
b.  Location and preservation plan for all wetlands, waterbodies, and other habitats, including setbacks, exotic species removal, and any revegetation requirements. 
c.  Location, preservation and restoration plan for any historic flowways. 
d.  Soil borings locations shown in the soil boring report. 
e.  Proposed method of dewatering and use of settling ponds. 
f.  Location of all staff gauges. 
g.  Location of rock crushing, asphalt plant or concrete plant operations. 
h.  Location and configuration of any vegetative noise buffers or landscape screening buffers and earthen berms. 
(d)  Site plans. Site plans for non-excavation operations shall include: 
(1)  Ownership and boundary lines, including bearings and distances. 
(2)  Location of haul routes or access roads. 
(3)  Adjoining and internal rights-of-way, easements, and lot ownership; natural physical features such as flowways; the one hundred-year floodplain; wetlands, lakes and critical wildlife habitat; all manmade features such as utility lines, wells, septic systems, storage tanks, drainage ditches, houses, and barns. 
(4)  Topographical elevations of the site. 
(5)  Proposed elevations, if applicable. 
(6)  Location of stockpiles, if applicable. 
(7)  Detailed erosion control methods. 
(8)  Location and preservation plan for all wetlands, waterbodies, and other habitats, including setbacks, exotic species removal, and any revegetation requirements. 
(9)  Location and configuration of any vegetative noise buffers or landscape screening buffers and earthen berms. 
(10)  Location of cement crushing or other operations proposing to alter clean debris, which operations may not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential zoning district. 
(11)  Reasonable, additional information as required by the earthmoving administrator to allow for a determination of sufficiency or completeness. 
(e)  Soil boring report. Soil borings are required when a proposed excavation depth is greater than twelve (12) feet. Soil boring reports shall include the following: 
(1)  There shall be one (1) boring per ten (10) acres; there shall be a minimum of three (3) borings per excavation. Locations of the test borings shall be based upon site specific conditions. 
(2)  Soil borings shall extend five (5) feet deeper than the proposed depth of the excavation, or to the top of the confining layer. 
(3)  Copies of results shall be signed and sealed by an engineer or geologist. 
(f)  Reclamation plans. 
(1)  Reclamation plans for RLE and stockpiling operations shall include the following: 
a.  A description of the manner in which restructuring and reshaping will be accomplished and a depiction of the revegetation of the site. List the types and amounts of each species used for revegetation. 
b.  A description of how the site will be maintained at least five (5) years after the reclamation is complete. 
c.  A depiction of what natural and manmade features will exist when the reclamation is complete. This requirement includes the location of mitigation or preservation areas established for wild life species, fences, walls, and other structures that will be on the property. 
(2)  Reclamation plans for all other operations shall meet the requirements listed in section 4-5-381(f)(1) and will also require a depiction of at least two (2) typical cross-sections each, with elevations, generally oriented north to south and east to west, showing areas to be filled, back-filled, reconstructed and/or reshaped. Water elevations and final grades shall also be shown. 
(3)  Reclamation plans shall be designed, signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Landscape Architect. 
(g)  Environmental surveys. 
(1)  All environmental surveys shall have been completed within one (1) year of application submittal. 
(2)  Environmental surveys shall include: 
a.  FLUCCS map and report of all land covers and forms on the site according to FLUCCS category level 3 at scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, unless a different scale is approved in writing by the earthmoving administrator in advance of application submittal. 
b.  A listed species survey performed in accordance with applicable state and/or federal survey guidelines. 
c.  A tree survey, including identification of all heritage trees. 
(h)  Environmental impact statement (EIS). An EIS is a written and graphic report that analyzes and illustrates the direct, indirect and cumulative impacts of an earthmoving operation upon vegetation, wildlife, wildlife habitat, endangered or threatened species, air quality, water quality, and other issues concerning the public's health, safety and welfare. 
The EIS shall include: 
(1)  All drainage calculations, signed, sealed, and dated by an appropriate registered professional, including supporting documentation demonstrating that the proposed project meets the requirements under environmental resource permit (ERP) rule 62-330.301, F.A.C. as amended or promulgated from time to time. 
(2)  Vegetation and wildlife, particularly: 
a.  Impacts on-site and to adjacent natural communities. 
b.  Impacts to, and mitigation proposed for, wildlife species that reside on or utilize the site, particularly those listed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service or Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission as endangered, threatened, or of special concern. 
(3)  Air quality, particularly: 
a.  Airborne debris from any excavation, blasting, stockpiling, sorting, vehicular circulation, or other activity. 
b.  Any exhaust or other emissions from equipment associated with the excavation. 
(4)  Noise from any equipment, blasting, stockpiling, sorting, vehicular circulation, or other activity. 
(5)  Hazardous materials and other potential contaminants, including any naturally occurring elements, particularly radiation, that could be harmful to the public if concentrated by any process associated with the proposed operation, such as dewatering, settling, stockpiling, or sorting. 
(6)  The EIS shall include any other information required by the earthmoving administrator due to unique circumstances. 
(i)  Hazardous materials assessment. The applicant shall provide a hazardous materials assessment of the site describing hazardous materials and other potential contaminants, including any naturally occurring elements, particularly radiation, that could be harmful to the public if concentrated by any process associated with the proposed excavation. 
(j)  Traffic impact analysis. The applicant shall provide a traffic impact analysis using a methodology as prescribed by the county's transportation engineer or county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 8, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-482. - Performance assurance for land reclamation (PALR). 
(a)  The amount of the PALR fee shall be calculated as required in the fee resolution adopted by the board of county commissioners. 
(b)  The PALR shall be required for commercial excavations and may be required for other earthmoving operations in a form acceptable to the county attorney. The PALR shall remain in effect throughout the duration of the permit term and for one (1) year after the permit expires or is no longer valid or in force. 
(c)  It is the property owner's responsibility to reclaim an earthmoving site prior to the expiration of a permit. Should appropriate reclamation action not occur, the county may utilize the PALR to reclaim the site if no other satisfactory solution has been agreed upon with [the] property owner. If a PALR does not exist and the county must reclaim an earthmoving site, a lien may be placed, at the county's sole discretion, on the property in an amount equal to the amount expended by the county to reclaim the site, including the county's attorney's fees and court costs, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 9, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-483. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-004, § 10, adopted Feb. 23, 2021, repealed § 3-5-483, which pertained to roadway service life reduction fee (RSLR) and derived from Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, adopted Sept. 23, 2014. 
Sec. 3-5-484. - Specific earthmoving permit process and procedures. 
(a)  Preapplication meetings. A preapplication conference is mandatory for new applications and major modifications. 
(b)  Earthmoving permit review process. 
(1)  Lake reconfiguration, canal excavation, RLE, stockpiling, and clean fill. 
a.  Applicants shall submit an application. An application shall expire within one (1) year of the date that it was determined by the county to be complete. An extension of the application for one (1) year may be granted by the earthmoving administrator provided: 
1.  A written request for an extension is received by the earthmoving administrator at least ten (10) working days prior to the expiration date. 
2.  The applicant demonstrates that the extension is required because of a delay caused by permitting agencies and not due to any fault of the applicant. 
3.  The applicant is in compliance with the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances for any property located in the county's jurisdiction and subject to this article. 
b.  The earthmoving administrator will review the application for completeness within five (5) business days of submittal and will notify the applicant of any deficiencies. If the earthmoving administrator deems the application to be incomplete, all review of the application shall cease until such time as the application is supplemented by the applicant and deemed complete by the earthmoving administrator. 
c.  Once the earthmoving administrator has determined that the application is complete, sufficiency review will begin. The application will be forwarded to other staff for their review. 
d.  County staff shall conduct their review and provide the earthmoving administrator a report containing comments and recommendations concerning the content of the application, whether it should be approved or not approved as submitted and specific information needed or permit conditions deemed necessary to comply with the provisions of this article and other applicable law. Initial staff review shall be completed within sixty (60) business days of the application being deemed complete. 
e.  Upon receipt of the county staff's report, the earthmoving administrator shall determine whether further information is required from the applicant or a decision of approval or denial can be made. Should it be determined that more information is required, the applicant will be informed, and all further review of the application will cease until the information is received. 
f.  Once any requested information is received, the earthmoving administrator, and other staff as appropriate, will conduct further review. Any reviews subsequent to the initial review shall occur within forty (40) business days of the submittal of new information and the applicant shall then be informed if the information adequately satisfies the issue in question. 
g.  When the earthmoving administrator determines that no further information from the applicant is necessary and all staff reviews have been finalized, the earthmoving administrator will prepare a letter to the applicant explaining the decision made, the reasons for the decision, and, if approved, any special conditions on the operation. 
1.  If the earth moving administrator approves the application: 
(i)  The applicant shall satisfy any outstanding requirements. 
(ii)  A permit shall be issued. The permit holder shall be the property owner or jointly to the applicant and the property owner. However, the property owner shall be held responsible for complying with all regulations and conditions of the permit and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
(iii)  The permit shall be posted at the site throughout the term of the activity. 
2.  If the earthmoving administrator does not approve the application, the applicant may appeal the decision to a hearing examiner at a public hearing. 
h.  Any amount of time taken by county staff to review an application above that time allocated for staff review in this subsection shall be applied to extend the expiration date of the application. 
(2)  Ag excavations and commercial excavations. 
a.  Applicants shall submit an application. An application shall expire within two (2) years of the date that it was determined to be complete. An extension of the application for one (1) year may be granted by the earth moving administrator, provided: 
1.  A written request for an extension is received by the earthmoving administrator at least twenty (20) working days prior to the expiration date. 
2.  The applicant demonstrates that the extension is required because of a delay caused by permitting agencies and not due to any fault of the applicant. 
3.  The applicant is in compliance with the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances for any property located in the county's jurisdiction and subject to this article. 
b.  The earthmoving administrator will review the application for completeness within ten (10) business days and notify the applicant of any deficiencies. If the earthmoving administrator deems the application to be incomplete, all review of the application shall cease until such time as the application is supplemented by the applicant and deemed complete by the earthmoving administrator. 
c.  Once the earthmoving administrator has determined that the application is complete, sufficiency review will begin. The application will be forwarded to other staff for their review. Initial staff review shall be completed within sixty (60) business days after the application is deemed complete unless review of the application by a consultant is necessary. If outside review of the application is required, one hundred twenty (120) working days may be allowed to complete the initial review. 
d.  The applicant is responsible for providing the county with all necessary information. The earthmoving administrator shall provide the applicant with written notice or notices of insufficiencies with the application when the initial staff review period is complete. The failure of the earthmoving administrator to mention insufficiencies shall not affect the county's right to require that the insufficiencies be addressed by the applicant when noticed. 
1.  Staff may cease review of the application until such time as an identified insufficiency has been addressed by the applicant. 
2.  If the applicant submits information to address an insufficiency, the county shall inform the applicant within sixty (60) business days if the information is adequate to address the issue in question, unless such information needs to be reviewed by a consultant. If a consultant must review the information, one hundred twenty (120) business days will be allowed for the review. 
e.  When the earthmoving administrator determines that the applicant has provided information to address all issues identified during staff review, the earthmoving administrator will finalize a master report, which shall include findings related to consistency with the comprehensive plan, this article, and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, and will provide an approval or denial of the application. 
1.  If approved, the earthmoving administrator may require special conditions to be placed on the operation. 
(i)  The applicant shall satisfy any outstanding requirements. 
(ii)  A permit shall be issued. The permit holder shall be the property owner or jointly to the applicant and the property owner. However, the property owner shall be held responsible for complying with all regulations and conditions of the permit and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
(iii)  The permit shall be posted at the site throughout the term of the excavation. 
2.  If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial to a hearing examiner. The applicant shall deliver written notice of intent to appeal the decision to the earthmoving administrator no later than sixty (60) days after the date of the master report. 
f.  If staff review time exceeds that allocated in this subsection, the total amount exceeded shall be applied to extend the expiration date of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 11, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-485. - Specific earthmoving permit approvals. 
The earthmoving administrator shall decide if the application is consistent with the comprehensive plan, this article, and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. The applicant has the burden of establishing that all requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-486. - Specific earthmoving permit appeal of a decision. 
An applicant may appeal a decision of the earthmoving administrator to a hearing examiner. 
(a)  If the hearing examiner determines that the applicant has not met the burden of proof that the application meets the requirements of the comprehensive plan, this article, and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, the application shall be denied and such determination shall be deemed final. Decisions of the hearing examiner may be appealed by filing a petition for certiorari in the Circuit Court of the Twentieth Judicial Circuit in and for Charlotte County in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure for the review of quasi-judicial decisions of a local government entity. 
(b)  If the hearing examiner determines that the application does meet the requirements of the comprehensive plan, this article, and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, the application shall be approved and such determination shall be deemed final. In this event: 
(1)  The applicant shall satisfy any outstanding requirements. 
(2)  A permit shall be issued. The permit holder and the lot owner, if not the same, shall be responsible for complying with all regulations and conditions of the permit and the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
(3)  The permit shall be posted at the site throughout the term of the excavation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-487. - Variances to earthmoving standards. 
Variances to the standards may be requested for proposed operations. The request must be included in the submitted application. 
(a)  Variance requests for standard earthmoving operations, as well as lake reconfiguration, canal excavation, RLE, stockpiling and clean fill earthmoving operations shall be granted or denied by the earthmoving administrator. 
(b)  Variance requests for ag excavations and commercial excavations shall be granted or denied by a hearing examiner. 
(c)  As a condition to any requested earthmoving variance, the applicant shall establish the following prerequisites to the satisfaction of the earthmoving administrator or hearing examiner before granting of the variance: 
(1)  The variance requested is not contrary to the public interest or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(2)  Strict adherence to the provisions of the standards would place an undue burden or hardship upon the operation due to unique conditions of the site and that hardship was not caused intentionally by an action of the applicant. 
(3)  The granting of a variance would not be injurious to or incompatible with contiguous uses or to the surrounding neighborhood or to the environment and would not allow relaxation of state or federal regulations. 
(4)  The hardship or conditions cannot reasonably be corrected or avoided by the applicant, there is no reasonable alternative, and the requested variance is the minimum modification of the standard at issue that will afford relief. 
(d)  Expenses and other monetary considerations are not a basis for proving undue burden or hardship. 
(e)  The earthmoving administrator or hearing examiner may add such conditions as deemed necessary in connection with the granting of any earthmoving variance. 
(f)  The specifics of an approved earthmoving variance, along with any accompanying conditions, shall be listed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-488. - Earthmoving permit periods of permit validity. 
(a)  The term of a standard earthmoving permit shall not exceed one (1) year unless otherwise stated on the permit. 
(b)  The term of a specific earthmoving permit shall commence upon the approval of the permit by the earthmoving administrator and will be valid for the following lengths of time: 
(1)  The term of lake reconfiguration, canal excavation, RLE, stockpiling and clean fill permits shall not exceed five (5) years. 
(2)  The term of ag excavation and commercial excavation permits shall not exceed ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-489. - Modifications to approved permits. 
(a) Modifications to an approved permit are approved or denied by the earthmoving administrator. For any modification to be approved, the operation shall be in compliance with the standards, requirements, and conditions under which the permit was issued and all state and federal permits shall be valid. In addition, a permit holder must be in compliance with the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances for any property located in the county's jurisdiction and subject to this article. 
Modifications to extend the period of permit validity shall comply with the following: 
(1)  For a permit issued under this article request to extend the period of permit validity shall be received by the earthmoving administrator at least twenty (20) business days prior to the permit expiration date. Late requests for extension shall not be accepted. Permit extensions may be requested two (2) times for two (2) years each for a total of four (4) years. Further extensions shall not be permitted. 
(2)  For an ag excavation or commercial excavation, the request to extend the period of permit validity shall be received by the earthmoving administrator at least forty (40) business days prior to the permit expiration date. However, requests for extension may not be submitted sooner than one (1) year before the permit expires. Late requests for extension shall not be accepted. Permit extensions for these permits may be requested in ten-year increments. 
(3)  Once a permit extension is granted, any new fees adopted by the board prior to the renewal of the permit shall apply. 
(4)  The earthmoving administrator is not obligated to approve an extension if it is determined that conditions within the vicinity of the earthmoving operation have changed since the initial approval or the continuing operation of the earthmoving operation would be detrimental [to] the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  If a modification application is not approved within one (1) year of the submittal date, it shall be deemed void and of no further effect. 
(c)  A denial of a modification request may be appealed to a hearing examiner. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 12, 2-23-21) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-004, § 12, adopted Feb. 23-, 2021 amended § 3-5-489 and in doing so changed the title of said section from "Earthmoving permit modifications to approved permits" to "Modifications to approved permits," as set out herein. 
Sec. 3-5-490. - Earthmoving permit inspections. 
The board of county commissioners finds that inspections of permitted excavations are required to ensure compliance with this article. A failure by a permittee to allow inspections under this article is hereby deemed to be a public nuisance and county officials are authorized hereby to take reasonable actions to protect the public health, safety and welfare for violations of this section. 
(a)  The earthmoving administrator, or designee, is authorized to inspect the lands affected under this article. This authority shall extend to lands already permitted and to property under review for a permit to ensure compliance with this article, including all conditions of a permit. 
(b)  Inspections of permitted activities shall be performed no fewer than three times per year. An inspector shall attempt to give at least seventy-two (72) hours' advance notice, but an inspector or other county official is not required to provide advance notice. Upon arrival the inspector shall attempt to contact operating personnel, but an inspector or other county official is not required to attempt to contact operating personnel. 
(c)  A copy of all required local, state and federal permits and reports must be available for inspection on site at all times. 
(d)  A copy of the site plan must be available for inspection on-site at all times. 
(e)  Any failure by a permittee to allow inspection of the permitted site shall be grounds for the inspector or other county official to issue a stop work order under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 13, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-491. - Specific earthmoving permit annual report. 
(a)  An annual report shall be submitted to the earthmoving administrator for each specific earthmoving permit in the manner as required in the county's reporting form. 
(b)  The annual report shall be submitted, including any applicable fees, on or before December 31 of each calendar year following the permit issuance date and shall include all activity through October 1 of that calendar year. For permits issued on or after October 1 of any calendar year, the applicant may submit the first annual report on the second December 31 following the permit issuance and on December 31 of each calendar year thereafter. 
(c)  Failure to file the required annual report shall be grounds for suspension of the activity authorized by the permit; however, an extension of time for filing may be granted by the earthmoving administrator for reasonable cause upon a written request received by the earthmoving administrator prior to the date that the report is due. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-492. - Earthmoving permit monitoring reports. 
Copies of all reports required by state or federal agencies shall also be simultaneously submitted to the earthmoving administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Sec. 3-5-493. - Earthmoving permit violations. 
(a)  Any person with any property interest in an earthmoving site as well as the permittee shall be responsible for any violation of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this article, any provisions adopted by reference herein, and of a permit issued pursuant to this article. If at any time during the term of a permit, the earthmoving administrator finds that the provisions of an earthmoving permit, this article, or other applicable law have been violated, the county may issue a stop work order, rescind a permit, initiate and prosecute an action before the code enforcement special magistrate, initiate an action for injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction or take any other action authorized under this Code of Laws and Ordinances, this article, state or federal law. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the activity is brought into compliance with the permit or as otherwise authorized under this article. 
(c)  The validity of a permit shall terminate if there is evidence that the permit is being used for, or the land is being prepared for, a use inconsistent with the application. Such evidence may include submittal of an application for a building permit, a special exception, a rezone, a site plan, a code enforcement notice of violation, or similar evidence. 
(d)  If an earthmoving operation occurs without an approved, required permit, the violator(s) shall be required to pay quadruple the regular fee for the application appropriate for that activity, in addition to any code violation fees, or other penalties described in this article. The county may, at its discretion, deny an application to bring a property into compliance with this subsection and require the lot owner to restore the lot to its previous condition. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2021-004, § 14, 2-23-21) 
Sec. 3-5-494. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agriculture means the science and art of production of plants and animals useful to humans, including to a variable extent the preparation of these products for human use and their disposal by marketing or otherwise, and includes aquaculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, bees, and any and all forms of farm products and farm production. 
Confining layer means the impermeable stratum confining an aquifer. 
Cumulative or cumulative impact means the total impact that results from a proposed earthmoving operation when added to the impacts of other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable commercial or residential development activity. 
Depth means the vertical distance between existing grade and the bottom of an excavation. 
Ditch means a linear trench not exceeding seven (7) feet in depth as measured from natural grade and twenty (20) feet in width. 
Dwelling unit means a structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation including living, cooking, and sanitary facilities. 
Earthmoving means any and all activities resulting in the repositioning of earth and the transporting and installing of earth. 
Engineer means a professional engineer registered and certified to practice in the State of Florida who is retained by the permittee, or an agent of the permittee. 
Excavation means the removal of earth, an all-inclusive term, below the existing grade. 
Excavation footprint means the area that is to be excavated up to top of bank. 
Fee resolution means a resolution passed by the board of county commissioners that sets forth fees, bond amounts, performance assurance requirements and other amounts payable by an applicant and permittee. 
Fill means the manmade installation or deposition of deposits of earth, sand, gravel, shell or other approved materials to increase the vertical or horizontal extent of land. 
Filling means the act of placing fill on land. 
Grading means leveling, smoothing, and reshaping the ground surface to a level base or specified slope, such as for construction work for a building foundation, the base course for a road, landscape and garden improvements, or surface drainage. 
Haul route means paved or unpaved roads within and outside the site that the permit specifies can be utilized to transport materials to an on-site or off-site destination. The terminus of the haul route shall be the nearest state maintained road. 
Lake means a body of standing water occupying a natural basin or manmade depression in the earth's surface. The term does not include stormwater ponds. 
Littoral zone or shelf means the near shore area of a water body where sunlight penetrates all the way to the sediment and allows aquatic plants to grow. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, and recorded in the public records of Charlotte County, Florida, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. For the purpose of this article, a lot is created on such date that a deed for the lot is lawfully first recorded in the public records of the county or the date that a plat has been lawfully recorded in the public records of the county and the lot is a part of the plat. 
Lot owner means a person or persons who own the land that is the subject of the earthmoving activity. 
Maintenance dredging means the excavation of sediments or other materials from presently existing and functional channels, ditches, canals, lakes, impoundments or other waterways of artificial construction to original design elevations. 
Natural grade shall have two (2) meanings depending on the condition of the lot. Natural grade for a lot developed with a structure where fill was required in order to raise the lot elevation is the grade of the lot after the construction is complete. Natural grade for all other lots means the elevation of the original or undisturbed natural surface of the ground as of 1980. 
PALR means performance assurance for land reclamation. 
Site means the portion of a lot that is used for any activity associated with an earthmoving operation. 
Sediment barrier shall mean a physical barrier through which water readily passes and that functions to trap or prevent the passage of sediments suspended within the transmitted water. 
Topsoil shall mean those soils classified as the upper part of the soil which are the most favorable material for plant growth, ordinarily rich in organic matter, and are used to top dress roads, lawns, and land affected by mining or development. 
(Ord. No. 2014-031, § 1, 9-23-14) 
Secs. 3-5-495—3-5-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 3-5-501. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Charlotte County Commercial Design Standards." 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-502. - Intent. 
The appearance of commercial establishments directly affect the visual image and attractiveness of Charlotte County. Generic developments and developments of poorer quality detract from the county's image and character. The intent of this article is to supplement existing development criteria for commercial development in order to improve the quality of life in the county. This enhancement will in turn attract new businesses and residents. This article further provides for flexibility of design in order to avoid a homogeneity that could also have a negative impact on individual commercial developments and the county. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-503. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article shall be ascribed a meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this article its most reasonable application. 
County Code means the Code of Laws and Ordinances, Charlotte County, Florida. 
Cornice means a continuous, molded projection that crowns a wall or other construction, or that divides it horizontally for composition purposes. 
Corridor street means any street, road, thoroughfare or other public way classified as a minor arterial, principal arterial, rural major collector, rural minor collector, or urban collector. 
Eave(s) mean the overhanging lower edge of a roof. 
Entrance means a means of ingress and egress to a building. 
Facade means the exterior faces of a building's walls. 
Front facade means the exterior face of the wall(s) facing the corridor street which serves a commercial development site. 
Parapet means a low wall at the edge of a terrace, balcony or roof; the extension of an exterior wall above the roof. 
Portico means an architectural entry feature structurally supported by columns or arches and protecting a doorway or walkway from the elements. 
Primary facade means all exterior building facades that face a public right-of-way or have a primary customer entrance. 
Zoning official means the "zoning official" as defined in section 3-9-2 of the County Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-504. - Application. 
(a)  This article applies to all development activities in the commercial general, commercial intensive, commercial tourist, commercial neighborhood, commercial highway and commercial office park zoning districts in unincorporated Charlotte County. Provided that this article shall not apply to areas in unincorporated Charlotte County for which specific design standards have been heretofore or shall be hereafter enacted, unless said specific design standards expressly provide otherwise. Further, nothing herein shall preclude the board of county commissioners from adopting additional or heightened standards which may be applied throughout unincorporated Charlotte County or within specified areas or districts of unincorporated Charlotte County. 
(b)  This article applies to new development, new stand alone buildings, and the redevelopment of existing buildings that increase gross floor area by more than fifty (50) percent. In addition, if more than fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation of the commercial structure has been destroyed, this article applies to the redevelopment of that structure. 
(c)  This article is not intended to prevent the use of alternative design solutions that meet the intent and purpose of this article, as determined by the zoning official. 
(d)  Compliance with this article shall be established in the architectural drawings and site plans submitted to the community development department at the time of application for building permits or site plan review, as applicable. 
(e)  In the event any portion of this article conflicts with any other County Code provision or provision of applicable law, the provision that establishes specific architectural themes shall prevail. In the event that neither conflicting provision establishes a specific architectural theme, then the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-081, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 3-5-505. - Building orientation. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a stronger streetscape along the county's corridors and to improve the appearance and the visual identity of the community. 
(b)  Buildings shall always be oriented so that the main entrances and windows face the corridor street that serves the subject property. Main entrances of corner lots shall be oriented on the facade facing the corridor street with the higher functional classification. For corner lots at intersections of streets with the same functional classification, the building shall be oriented so that the main entrances do not face residential districts. Buildings on corner lots may also be oriented so that their main entrance faces the intersection of the two (2) streets with the highest functional classification. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-506. - Appearance, building mass and design treatments. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to encourage commercial development that improves the view from the street and requires buildings to be designed with architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest consistent with the community's identity and character. Further, these standards reduce the mass, scale and monolithic appearance of large unadorned walls, particularly those that are visible from the street. 
(b)  All exterior building facades that face a public right-of-way, even if they are separated by a median or interior travel way, or have a primary customer entrance are defined as primary facades and must meet the primary facade standards outlined herein. 
(c)  Primary facades shall be consistent in terms of design, materials, details and treatments. 
(d)  Primary facades shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) of the following design treatments: 
(1)  An architectural distinction around or above the primary customer entrance. 
(2)  Canopies or porticos. 
(3)  Peaked roof forms. 
(4)  Overhangs of a minimum of three (3) feet wide. 
(5)  Arcades a minimum of six (6) feet wide. 
(6)  Arches or arched forms. 
(7)  Display windows of a minimum of six (6) feet high. 
(8)  Ornamental or structural details that are integrated into the building structure. 
(9)  A tower such as a clock tower or bell tower. 
(10)  Sculptured artwork (excluding corporate logos or advertising). 
(11)  Any other treatment that, in the opinion of the zoning official, meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
(e)  Blank areas shall not exceed ten (10) feet in a vertical direction or twenty (20) feet in a horizontal direction on a primary facade. Relief and reveal work depth must be a minimum of one-half (½) inch. 
(f)  Building facades shall include a repeating pattern and shall include no less than two (2) of the design elements listed below. At least one (1) of the two (2) design elements must repeat horizontally. All elements shall repeat at intervals of no more than twenty-five (25) feet, either horizontally or vertically. 
(1)  Texture change. 
(2)  Color change. 
(3)  Material change. 
(4)  Architectural features such as bays, reveals, offsets, or projecting ribs which must be no less than twelve (12) inches in width. 
(5)  Building offsets or projections located on upper levels that are a minimum of three (3) feet in width. 
(6)  Pattern change. 
(7)  Any other element that, in the opinion of the zoning official, meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
(g)  Buildings located on corner lots at an intersection of two (2) or more corridor streets shall be designed to emphasize their location as transition points within their community or commercial block. Buildings or structures on corner lots shall include embellishments such as corner towers, clock towers or other design features as may be approved by the zoning official to emphasize their position. 
(1)  Texture change. 
(2)  Color change. 
(3)  Material change. 
(4)  Architectural features such as bays, reveals, offsets, or projecting ribs which must be no less than twelve (12) inches in width. 
(5)  Building offsets or projections located on upper levels that are a minimum of three (3) feet in width. 
(6)  Pattern change. 
(7)  Any other element that, in the opinion of the zoning official, meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
(h)  Overhead doors shall not be located on the primary facade of any new, expanded or redeveloped structure facing or visible from principal arterials, minor arterials, urban collectors or major rural collectors, and should be located consistent with the requirements of section 3-5-513 of this article. If there is a demonstrated need which dictates the placement of such door on the primary facade, the appearance of overhead doors in the primary facade of a structure must be minimized by blending it into the primary facade of a structure. This shall be accomplished by painting the overhead door the same color as the primary facade and by either recessing that portion of the primary facade containing the overhead door by three (3) feet or by a combination of recessing the primary facade and eave overhang. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03; Ord. No. 2005-081, § 2, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2006-071, § 1, 8-15-06) 
Sec. 3-5-507. - Facade or wall height transition. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure that new development blends with surrounding buildings in regard to height. 
(b)  New buildings that are to be located within two hundred (200) feet of any existing commercial building, and that are to be more than twice the height of any existing building located within two hundred (200) feet of the new building, shall incorporate transitional height elements to segue the height of the new building to the height of the existing building(s). The transitional height element must be incorporated on the new building(s) at the average height of existing building(s) located within two hundred (200) feet of the new building. 
(c)  Transitional height elements may include: 
(1)  Cornices or other decorative elements which run the length and width of the building and project a minimum of three (3) feet from the wall. 
(2)  Offset floors. 
(3)  Any other element that, in the opinion of the zoning official, meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-508. - Building materials and colors. 
(a)  Intent. Exterior building materials and colors contribute significantly to the visual impact of a building on a community. Therefore, it is the intent of this section to require development that improves the overall quality of life. 
(b)  The uses of certain building materials are restricted as follows: 
(1)  Metal panels, plastic siding and/or tiles shall not be used to cover more than fifty (50) percent of any primary facade except that vinyl siding may be used to cover more than fifty (50) percent of a primary facade when it is necessary to achieve a recognizable architectural theme approved by the zoning official. An example of the latter is the use of vinyl siding to imitate lapped wood siding to create an "Old Florida" look. 
(2)  Smooth faced concrete on a primary facade shall have a cementious exterior coating (the visual equivalent of stucco or some other decorative finish). Untreated concrete block is not an acceptable finished material for primary facades. 
(c)  The uses of colors on buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  No more than four (4) colors shall be used on the primary facades of the building. This shall not apply to the use of the colors for artistic purposes such as for use in a mural or artistic rendering on the side of a building. Corporate logos or advertising are not considered an artistic purpose. 
(2)  The color scheme chosen shall be consistent for all primary facades. 
(3)  The use of black or florescent colors is prohibited as the predominant exterior building color. 
(4)  Building trim and accent areas may feature any color(s), limited to ten (10) percent of the affected facade segment, with a maximum trim height of twenty-four (24) inches total for its shortest distance. 
(5)  Building trim and accent areas may feature any color(s) on an area that does not exceed ten (10) percent of the affected facade segment. Trim and accent areas shall have a maximum vertical measurement of twenty-four (24) inches when applied horizontally and a maximum horizontal measurement of twenty-four (24) inches when applied vertically. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-509. - Roofs. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to add visual interest, to reduce massing, to improve the aesthetic quality of the design and to screen rooftop equipment by requiring roof treatments for commercial development. 
(b)  All rooftop equipment shall be concealed from public view in a manner consistent with the architectural design of the building. 
(c)  All commercial buildings are required to have variations in rooflines and roof features that are consistent with the building's mass and scale. In addition, roofs shall include at least two (2) of the following features: 
(1)  Decorative parapets. 
(2)  A three dimensional cornice treatment, a minimum of twelve (12) inches high with a minimum of three (3) changes in the relief or thickness. 
(3)  Two (2) or more roof planes per primary facade. 
(6)  Overhanging eaves that extend at least three (3) feet beyond the supporting walls, with a minimum fascia of six (6) inches deep. 
(6)  Additional vertical roof changes with a minimum change in elevation of two (2) feet. 
(7)  Use of additional architectural roof styles or treatments determined to be consistent with the intent of this section by the zoning official. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-510. - Parking. 
(a)  Intent. Large, unbroken expanses of paved parking areas create heat islands, degrade the aesthetic appeal of parking areas, can generate excessive stormwater runoff, and otherwise detract from the appearance of a development site. The intent of this section is to require parking designs that lessen the impacts of paved parking area requirements. 
(b)  The dominance of expansive parking lots shall be reduced by utilizing at least two (2) of the following techniques: 
(1)  Breaking large lots into smaller blocks of parking separated by pedestrian walkways, buildings, open space or other method. 
(2)  Locating employee parking in less used areas. 
(3)  Utilizing shared parking techniques where there is a mix of uses in one (1) area that have staggered "peak hour" demand periods. Calculations should be made to reduce the total amount of required parking. 
(4)  Permeable paving in over-flow or seasonal parking areas in an effort to reduce the amount of surface run-off. 
(c)  Except where precluded by drive aisles or other vehicular use areas necessary for shared parking or joint access between properties, perimeter landscaping as required by section 3-5-395 of the landscaping portion of the County Code shall be required for all parking areas even if the paved parking area is screened by buildings or structures. 
(d)  Applicants that comply with subsections (b) and (c) in corridor areas shall be allowed to reduce the amount of required parking by twenty (20) percent. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-511. - Pedestrian access and walkways. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide convenient and safe access to commercial establishments for both pedestrians as well as vehicles, thereby encouraging modes of transportation other than the automobile. 
(b)  Pedestrian access ways must be provided from the building entry(s) to surrounding streets, external sidewalks, and outparcels. The minimum ratio for pedestrian walkways will be one (1) pedestrian way for every public point of vehicular ingress or egress to a project, excluding those for service or delivery vehicles. 
(c)  Crosswalks shall also be provided from parking lots or areas to the building's front and rear entrances. 
(d)  Pedestrian access ways and crosswalks shall be made distinct from other areas by using a variation in paving, landscaping or some other method. 
(e)  All pedestrian access ways shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide and shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-512. - Lighting. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to prevent the intrusion of light from commercial projects onto adjacent properties and to create a compatible and consistent design of lighting for the project. This section further intends to prevent the interference of lighting with automotive and pedestrian traffic, which can create potentially hazardous conditions. 
(b)  The design of the actual lighting fixtures shall complement the design of the project in style, color, materials, and location. Lighting shall have a consistent design for the entire site, including outparcels. 
(c)  Light fixtures shall be a maximum of thirty (30) feet in height in parking areas and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height in all other areas of the site, but shall in no case rise above the roof line of the buildings of the site which it serves. 
(d)  Lighting shall be designed to prevent the glare or spillage of light onto adjacent properties and to prevent hazardous interference with automotive and pedestrian traffic. In order to accomplish this, all exterior lighting shall be directional, use recessed light bulbs, filters or shielding to conceal the source of illumination. 
(e)  Low level lighting (i.e., the illuminated element of the fixture is four (4) feet or less in height) directed downwards onto the ground surface shall be utilized for pedestrian walkways. 
(f)  No portion of this section is intended to prevent the use of lighting for security purposes so long as it does not interfere with adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-513. - Loading, storage, equipment, maintenance, service, and refuse areas. 
(a)  Intent. While loading, storage, and equipment areas are typically essential components of a development, such areas are often unsightly, and do not contribute to the aesthetics of a building or development site. The intent of this section is to mitigate the negative aspects of such areas while still allowing their intended uses. 
(b)  Loading, storage, and equipment areas shall be located at the rear or sides of buildings and shall be fully buffered from the view of adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Maintenance and service areas shall be fully enclosed, and when not housed within the same building as the primary business of the subject commercial operation, shall be fully enclosed in structures whose design and color is consistent with the primary building(s) on the site. 
(d)  Refuse areas shall be located at the rear or sides of buildings and shall be fully buffered from the view of adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-514. - Outparcels. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure consistency of design between buildings constructed on outparcels and the buildings constructed on the principal area of a project site that may have more than one (1) delineated, buildable lot, and which may or may not be developed at the same time or by the same builder. 
(b)  All exterior facades of buildings constructed on outparcels of developments which received preliminary site plan approval subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be considered primary facades and shall employ architectural, site, landscape, and building design elements that are integrated with and common to those used on the primary building(s) constructed on the project site. These common design elements shall include colors, roof treatments, and materials. 
(c)  All exterior facades of buildings constructed on outparcels of developments that received preliminary site plan approval prior to the effective date of this article shall be considered primary facades and shall incorporate those architectural, site, landscape, and building design elements that are consistent with the main building(s) already located on site which are consistent with these requirements. For those elements required by this article that are lacking, the development shall incorporate the necessary elements in compliance with this section. This shall not be construed to preclude the zoning official from approving alternative designs on such sites which do not meet the letter of this article, but nonetheless result in efficient, aesthetically pleasing development in harmony with structures already existing on the site and which do not detract from the appearance of the community. 
(d)  Adjacent outparcels shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian access between parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-515. - Unified sign plans. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure consistency of design for signs associated within a development, whether developed as a single or multiple phases, and to ensure consistency of signage between signs constructed on outparcels and the buildings constructed on the principal area of a project site that may have more than one (1) delineated, buildable lot, and which may or may not be developed at the same time or by the same builder. 
(b)  In addition to advertising goods and services available at a location, signs are intended to compliment, rather than detract from, the visual impact of a commercial development on the community by using design elements consistent with those employed for the building(s), and by minimizing conflicts with on-site landscaping and vehicular use areas. 
(c)  All signs shall comply with the requirements of section 3-9-95 of the County Code. 
(d)  Where multiple on-premises signs are proposed for a single site or project (including outparcels), or in the case of a shopping center or multi-tenant/use building, a unified sign plan shall be employed. For such instances, application(s) for building permits or site plan approval, as applicable, shall be accompanied by a written narrative and graphic depiction of the signage that will be developed on-site which illustrates consistency of design. The unified sign plan may, upon application to and approval of the zoning official, be amended to reflect style changes or tenant needs. Design elements, which shall be addressed in both graphic and narrative form, include: 
(1)  Adherence with the provisions of section 3-9-95 of the County Code; 
(2)  Colors; 
(3)  Construction materials: 
(4)  Architectural design; 
(5)  Illumination method; 
(6)  Copy style; and 
(7)  Sign type(s) and locations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 3-5-516. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  Variances from the provisions of this article shall be in accordance with section 3-9-6.1 of the County Code. 
(b)  Appeals of the interpretations or decisions of the zoning official made pursuant to this article shall be in accordance with section 3-9-6 of the County Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-023, § 1, 5-27-03) 
Secs. 3-5-517—3-5-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - DECLARATION OF UNITY OF TITLE 

Sec. 3-5-541. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Execution and recording of a "Declaration of Unity of Title" by a property owner allows that owner's real property to be considered as one unified lot or parcel for specific purposes and restricts the property owner's ability to sell or transfer less than the entire parcel to another person or entity without obtaining a release of the Declaration of Unity of Title. The subject property may include two (2) or more adjacent platted lots, parcels, or portions thereof, or it may be one (1) large parcel or tract that the owner does not intend to fully or further develop. Instances where a "Declaration of Unity of Title" may be utilized include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  A property owner who has a dwelling unit on one (1) platted lot and who desires to construct a residential accessory structure on an adjacent platted lot that is under the same ownership. 
(2)  A property owner who has a dwelling unit on one (1) platted lot and who desires to install plumbing fixtures in a residential accessory structure that is on an adjacent platted lot under the same ownership without installing a separate water meter for the residential accessory structure. 
(3)  A property owner of an oversized or large lot or tract that is included in a water or sewer capital MSBU and the owner does not intend to subdivide or construct more than one (1) dwelling unit on the oversized or large lot or tract. 
(4)  An owner of property consisting of adjacent platted lots who desires an exemption from habitat conservation plan development fees pursuant to section 3-5-268 of this Code. 
(b)  A declaration of unity of title will not be approved by Charlotte County in the following situations: 
(1)  Property with an existing principal structure and accessory structure that are being served by separate water meters: 
(2)  Where a proposed accessory structure contains sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities; or 
(3)  Where the property, or any portion thereof, has delinquent water or sewer utility fees or charges. 
(Ord. No. 2018-021, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 3-5-542. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adjacent: For purposes of this article, "adjacent" means a lot or parcel that is contiguous to and shares a boundary with another lot or parcel. Lots or parcels separated by a roadway or platted right-of-way are not considered to be "adjacent" for purposes of this article. 
Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms, designed and equipped for use as living quarters, containing sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities. 
Declaration of unity of title: A written instrument executed by a property owner whereby the property owner promises and agrees that the parcel, lots or tracts included in the unity of title will not be conveyed, mortgaged or leased separate and apart from each other and will be held together as one (1) tract. 
Residential accessory structure: A subordinate structure located on the same lot as the principal residential structure, but not attached to the principal residential structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to the principal residential structure. Examples of residential accessory structures include, but are not limited to, detached garages, sheds, workshops, and boat houses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-021, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 3-5-543. - Application requirements. 
Every application seeking joinder of two (2) or more platted lots with a declaration of unity of title shall include the following information: 
(a)  Property owner(s) name(s) and address; 
(b)  Legal description of the property; 
(c)  Description and location (lot number) of all existing structures; 
(d)  Description of proposed structure(s) and location (lot number); 
(e)  Description of all plumbing facilities that are proposed to be installed in the accessory structure (if applicable). 
(Ord. No. 2018-021, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 3-5-544. - Approval procedure. 
(a)  When a completed application is submitted by a property owner requesting approval of a declaration of unity of title, the department of community development will review the application and the proposed declaration of unity of title. If applicable, the application will be routed to the utility department and the community services department for review. 
(b)  Once the application is complete, a declaration of unity of title form will be provided to the property owner/applicant and the property owner/applicant will execute the declaration, in the presence of two (2) witnesses and a notary public. The notary public may sign the document as one (1) of the witnesses. Prior to recording the declaration, the department of community development will forward the declaration to the county attorney for review. After the declaration is reviewed by the county attorney, it will be recorded by the property owner in the public records of Charlotte County. 
(c)  No building permit will be issued for an accessory structure located on an adjacent lot from the principal structure until a declaration of unity of title has been properly executed and recorded for the property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-021, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Sec. 3-5-545. - Release of declaration of unity of title. 
The county administrator, or designee, is authorized to release a declaration of unity of title when the property owner desires to sell or transfer less than the entire unified parcel, provided the property owner has complied with the following: 
(a)  If applicable, the property owner must demolish or convert the accessory structure to a dwelling unit, including the installation of a separate water line and meter is the accessory structure has been converted to a residential dwelling unit. 
(b)  When a release of a declaration of unity of title is approved, the property owner will be provided with a release executed by the county administrator or designee and the property owner will be responsible for recording the release in the public records of Charlotte County prior to conveying any portion of the unified parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2018-021, § 1, 5-22-18) 
Secs. 3-5-546—3-5-559. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - VESTED RIGHTS 

Sec. 3-5-560. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Charlotte County "Vested Rights Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2008-026, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 3-5-561. - Declaration of intent and purpose. 
In recognition of the fact that certain land development rights of property owners may be vested with respect to certain provisions of the Charlotte County Comprehensive Plan and the land development regulations adopted to implement the comprehensive plan, this article establishes the procedures and requirements for vested rights decisions, modifications to vested rights decisions and for the challenge of such decisions. Any person claiming vested rights to develop property or seeking a change to a vested rights decision shall make application for a vested rights decision pursuant to this article. Any party aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision to grant or deny an application for a vested rights decision shall appeal such decision pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-026, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 3-5-562. - Vested rights. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in the comprehensive plan and land development regulations, a development which is determined to have vested rights pursuant to this article shall be vested from the requirements of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations, but only to the extent expressly stated in the vested rights decision rendered pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-026, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 3-5-563. - Preliminary vested rights decision. 
(a)  Any person claiming vested rights pursuant to F.S. section 163.3167(8) shall submit an application asserting such claim to the growth management department, or other designee of the county administrator (the "department"), together with the specific legal justification and factual data to support such claim. Such data may include, but is not limited to, copies of documents which evidence previous plat or zoning approvals and such other county approvals and actions, and actions, investments, and other acts in reliance of the claimant or its predecessor(s)-in-title which the claimant asserts is the basis for a vesting decision. The applicant shall also list with particularity the provisions of the comprehensive plan and land development regulations from which the applicant asserts his or her development is vested. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the board of county commissioners. The department shall make a determination whether or not a claim of vested rights has been established pursuant to this article. If the department determines that a claim of vested rights has been established, it shall issue a preliminary decision which describes the vested rights of the development and which reflects the basis for the vesting decision, the nature and extent of such vested rights and any restrictions or conditions thereon which are required to recognize and maintain such vested rights status. If the department determines that a claim of vested rights has not been established, it shall issue a preliminary decision which reflects the basis for this determination. 
(b)  Any person may apply for a decision that a proposed change to a development which has been determined to have vested rights will not divest such vested rights, upon a determination by the department that such change will not create additional impacts on public facilities and cultural and natural resources and is: 
(1)  In a community redevelopment area created pursuant to F.S. Chapter 163, and the proposed change is consistent with the community redevelopment area plan and is otherwise consistent with the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations; or 
(2)  In an infill area within the urban service area overlay district and the proposed change is otherwise consistent with the comprehensive plan and the land development regulations and proposes a development plan which furthers the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan regarding redevelopment. 
The applicant shall submit an analysis which measures the impacts of the proposed change and such additional data as may be required by the department to support the application. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the board of county commissioners. 
The department shall make a determination whether or not a change to a vested development will divest vested rights for which a final decision has been made pursuant to this article. If the department determines that the proposed change will not divest such vested rights, it shall issue a preliminary decision which reflects the basis for the determination that the change to the vested development will not divest such vested rights, the nature and extent of the vested rights and any restrictions or conditions thereon which are required to recognize and maintain such vested rights status. If the department determines that the proposed change will divest such vested rights, it shall issue a preliminary decision which reflects the basis for this determination. 
(c)  The department shall prepare forms which shall be used in the preparation of claims of vested rights, applications for a change to a development for which vested rights have been recognized in a final decision issued pursuant to this article and requests to challenge or support a vested rights decision filed pursuant to this article. 
(d)  The department shall issue, no sooner than fifteen (15) days and no later than thirty (30) days after a complete and sufficient application for a vested rights decision or a change to a vested development pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), above, respectively, is filed, a preliminary decision which reflects its determination in response to such application, provided that if the department determines that an application is incomplete or insufficient, it shall issue a letter indicating the points of incompleteness or insufficiency within the same thirty-day period. 
(e)  Requirements for notice of an application for a vested rights decision. 
(1)  Within ten (10) days after the filing of an application pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), above, the County shall provide notice of such application by publication consistent with the provisions of F.S. section 125.66(4)(b)2. The county shall also post notice prominently at the site that is the subject of the application. 
(2)  The notice (advertisement and posting) shall also provide: 
a.  An aggrieved or adversely affected party has the right to request a quasi-judicial hearing before the county; 
b.  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of issuance of a preliminary decision pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) above, any aggrieved or adversely affected party who wishes to challenge or support such decision shall request a quasi-judicial hearing. 
c.  The sole method for appeal of a vested rights decision ultimately rendered by the county pursuant to this article upon exhaustion of the hearings which are available under this article, is by an appeal filed by a petition for writ of certiorari filed in circuit court no later than thirty (30) days following rendition of the final decision pursuant to F.S. section 163.3215(4); 
d.  The written procedures describing the hearing process, including how to initiate the process, the timeframes for initiating the process, the location of the hearings and a statement which sets forth the prohibitions on ex parte communications, together with a copy of this ordinance and the forms promulgated under subsection (c), may be obtained at the office of the department; and 
e.  Copies of the preliminary decision may be obtained at the department. 
(f)  The board of county commissioners shall, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged by the county for all applications and requests for hearings made pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-026, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 3-5-564. - Quasi-judicial hearing process. 
(a)  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of issuance of a preliminary decision pursuant to subsection 3-5-563(a) or (b), above, any aggrieved or adversely affected party who wishes to challenge or support such decision shall request a quasi-judicial hearing to challenge or support the preliminary decision on the basis that it is not consistent with the comprehensive plan, the land development regulations or both. Such request shall be filed with the department on forms prepared pursuant to subsection 3-5-563(c) and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established by resolution of the board of county commissioners. For purposes of this article, the term "party" or "parties" shall mean an "aggrieved or adversely affected party", as such term is defined in F.S. section 163.3215(2). The county shall not be bound by the preliminary decision. If no hearing is requested, the preliminary decision shall become final. 
(b)  A party shall not be required to be represented by an attorney in order to participate in the hearings. 
(c)  Quasi-judicial hearing before special master. 
(1)  Within forty-five (45) calendar days after a request to challenge or support the preliminary decision is submitted pursuant to subsection (a), above, a quasi-judicial hearing shall be held before an impartial special master to determine whether the preliminary decision is consistent with the comprehensive plan, the land development regulations or both. If multiple parties have requested a quasi-judicial hearing pursuant to subsection (a), above, to challenge or support the same preliminary decision, the county shall consolidate all such requests and shall hold a single hearing before the special master. If a party needs additional time to prepare and present a case for the hearing, the department may grant up to an additional thirty (30) days to do so, upon a determination that such additional time is necessary. 
(2)  Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing before the special master, the county shall provide notice of such hearing by publication consistent with the provisions of F.S. section 125.66(4)(b)2. The county shall also post notice prominently at the site that is the subject of the application. The clerk of the board shall also give notice of the set date and time of the hearing by certified mail to the parties. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date set. 
(3)  All parties shall have the opportunity to prepare and present a case for the hearing, to require the disclosure of witnesses and exhibits and to take depositions of witnesses. 
(4)  The special master shall be an attorney who has at least five (5) years' experience. The special master shall have the power to rule on procedural matters, swear witnesses and take their testimony under oath, to issue subpoenas and other orders regarding the conduct of the proceedings, and to compel entry upon the land. The special master shall allow relevant testimony and evidence regarding standing and objections thereto, which shall be a part of the record of the proceedings, but shall not exclude any person from participating in the hearing. 
(5)  Any person who presents testimony or evidence at the hearing shall sign an attendance sheet providing his or her name and mailing address. All testimony shall be under oath. 
(6)  To the maximum extent practicable, the hearing shall be informal. Questioning shall be confined as closely as possible to the scope of direct testimony. The special master may call and question witnesses as he or she deems necessary and appropriate. The special master shall decide all questions of procedure. 
(7)  Ex parte communications relating to the merits of the matter under review shall not be made by any person to the special master. 
(8)  At the hearing before the special master, all parties shall have the opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues involved which are related to the preliminary decision and to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence. Public testimony shall be allowed. 
(9)  At the hearing before the special master, staff of the department shall present the department's preliminary decision, explain the reasoning for its findings and preliminary decision and answer any questions of the special master. 
(10)  The special master shall recommend written findings of fact and conclusions of law. The standard of review applied by the special master in determining whether a preliminary decision is consistent with the comprehensive plan, the land development regulations or both, shall be strict scrutiny in accordance with Florida law. 
(11)  The special master shall file his or her written recommendation within seven (7) working days of the close of the hearing, with a copy being provided to the clerk of the board. The clerk of the board shall, on the same calendar day or the next working day, mail by certified mail, or otherwise deliver, a copy of the recommendation to the parties and to any person who participated at the hearing and signed the attendance sheet at the hearing before the special master. 
(d)  Quasi-judicial hearing before board of county commissioners. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days following the issuance of the written recommendation of the special master, a duly-noticed quasi-judicial hearing shall be held before the board of county commissioners. 
(2)  No less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing before the board, the county shall provide notice of such hearing by publication consistent with the provisions of F.S. section 125.66(4)(b)2. The county shall also post notice prominently at the site that is the subject of the application. The clerk of the board shall also give notice of the set date and time of the hearing by certified mail to the parties and to any person who participated at the hearing and who signed an attendance sheet at the hearing before the special master. Such notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(3)  The board shall be bound by the special master's findings of fact, unless the findings of fact are not supported by competent substantial evidence. The board may modify the conclusions of law if it finds that the special master's application or interpretation of law is erroneous. The board may make reasonable legal interpretations of its comprehensive plan and land development regulations without regard to whether the special master's interpretation is labeled as a finding of fact or a conclusion of law. The board may question witnesses and parties. 
(4)  Any person who presents evidence or testimony at the hearing shall sign in on an attendance sheet. All testimony shall be under oath. 
(5)  At the hearing before the board, all parties shall have the opportunity to respond, to present evidence and argument on all issues which are related to the special master's recommendations on the preliminary decision and to other matters properly presented to the special master and to conduct cross-examination and submit rebuttal evidence. Public testimony shall be allowed. 
(6)  At the hearing before the board, staff of the department shall present the department's preliminary decision, explain the reasoning for its findings and preliminary decision and answer any questions of the board. 
(7)  Any ex parte communication relating to the merits of the matter under review may not be made to members of the board after the written recommendation of the special master has been received and officially date stamped by the county clerk. 
(8)  The final decision of the board shall be provided in writing within fifteen (15) days of the close of the hearing and shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law, with a copy being provided to the clerk of the board. The clerk of the board shall, on the same calendar day or the next working day, mail by certified mail, or otherwise deliver a copy of the recommendation to the parties and to any person who participated at the hearing and who signed an attendance sheet at the hearing before the board. The final decision of the board is not considered rendered or final until officially date-stamped by the county clerk. 
(e)  The procedures for notices and hearings in this article are adopted pursuant to F.S. section 163.3215(4). The provisions of this article shall be construed in a manner so as to conform to the requirements of F.S. section 163.3215(4). A party shall bring all actions for relief in connection with a decision issued pursuant to this article under the procedures set forth in this article. The sole method by which a party may challenge any decision under this article shall be as provided in F.S. section 163.3215(4). 
(Ord. No. 2008-026, § 1, 3-18-08) 
Chapter 3-6 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; parks and recreation, Ch. 1-11; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 2-4; impact fees, Ch. 3-3.5; planning and development, Ch. 3-5; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7; water and sewers, Ch. 3-8; sewer and water districts, Ch. 4-5; streets, drainage and lighting districts, Ch. 4-6; financing public works, § 1-7-4; contracting, § 1-10-33; toll bridge license, § 1-10-57; coastal construction code, § 3-2-156 et seq.; plats, § 3-5-66 et seq.; storm water, flood plain wetlands, § 3-5-111 et seq.; visibility at road intersections, § 3-9-97. 
State Law reference— Power of county to provide and regulate roads, bridges, tunnels and related facilities, F.S. § 125.01(1)(m); county road system, F.S. Ch. 336; county road and bridge indebtedness, F.S. Ch. 344. 
Annotation—Ord. No. 71-6, which authorized a tax against property in a city for road improvements in unincorporated areas, provided benefits for city residents and is constitutional, Burke v. Charlotte County, 286 So.2d 199 (1973). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-6-1. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or to fail to comply with, the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 3-6-2. - Authority to prohibit use of bridges. 
(a)  It is hereby found and determined by the board of county commissioners that fishing from, going upon or using bridges, or portions thereof, in certain designated areas or upon designated bridges is dangerous and hazardous to the public so using them within the unincorporated areas of the county, and that the placement of appropriate signs thereon prohibiting such use is in the public interest and therefore a proper county function. 
(b)  The board of county commissioners may designate such bridges, or portions thereof, dangerous for purposes of fishing or other use thereon and may place or cause to be placed thereon appropriate signs or other visible warning devices prohibiting the use thereof by any person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of any bridge in violation of any such sign or other device. 
(Ord. No. 72-5, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-72) 
Sec. 3-6-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-38, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 1988, repealed § 3-6-3, relative to culvert installations, as derived from Res. No. 68-30, adopted Oct. 27, 1968. 
Sec. 3-6-4. - Commercial use of right-of-way. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to make commercial use of the right-of-way of any county-maintained road for the following purposes: 
(1)  The sale or the display for sale of any merchandise; 
(2)  The servicing or repairing of any vehicle except the rendering of emergency service; 
(3)  The storage of vehicles being serviced or repaired or abutting property or elsewhere; 
(4)  The solicitation for the sale of goods, property or services; or 
(5)  The display of advertising of any sort. 
(b)  Persons holding valid occupational licenses issued by the county may, within the unincorporated area of the county, make sales from vehicles standing on the right-of-way to occupants of abutting property only. 
(Ord. No. 76-3, §§ 1, 2, 2-3-76) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, Ch. 1-10. 
Sec. 3-6-5. - Newsracks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Newsracks means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers, periodicals or other publications. 
Owner means the particular person who is responsible for installing and/or maintaining a newsrack. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation, association, business or other legal entity. 
Public rights-of-way means a strip of land dedicated or deeded to the public and accepted by the board of county commissioners, occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, driveway access, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, storm drainage way, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, sidewalk/bicycle path or for similar special use and within which traditional public discourse and communication occurs and may occur. 
Roadway means the portion of a street or highway, including shoulders, for the intended use of vehicles. 
Rut shall be deemed to be the stripping away or compression of grass, groundcover, or ground in a drainage swale which results in a groove in the swale deeper than three (3) inches. 
Street means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, medians and sidewalks. 
(b)  Standards and requirements. 
(1)  No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway. 
(2)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public right-of-way when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental uses, or when such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location. 
(3)  Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way shall also comply with the following standards: 
a.  No newsrack shall exceed fifty-four (54) inches in height or twenty-four (24) inches in depth. 
b.  No newsrack shall be installed, used or maintained: 
1.  On any sidewalk located on county owned property or public rights- of-way; 
2.  Within three (3) feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
3.  Within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox or other emergency facility; 
4.  Within three (3) feet of any driveway; 
5.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than four (4) feet; 
6.  Within three (3) feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
7.  In violation of any regulations regarding visibility at street intersections. 
8.  In violation of any clear zone standards as determined by the public works department. 
c.  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times. Each newspaper rack shall be maintained so that: 
1.  It is free of graffiti; 
2.  It is free of dirt and grease; 
3.  It is free of chipped, faded, peeling, or cracked paint; 
4.  It is free of rust and corrosion; 
5.  The clear plastic or glass parts through which the publications are viewed are unbroken and free of cracks, dirt, and discoloration; and 
6.  The structured parts are not broken. 
d.  Each newsrack owner shall retain responsibility for ensuring each newsrack is secured or tied down appropriately. 
e.  A site will be deemed inappropriate for newsracks if vehicular traffic creates ruts or other wear and tear upon the paved or unpaved portion of the roadway, right-of-way or other public property to the extent that maintenance of same is required more frequently than once each six (6) months by the county unless the owner agrees in writing to reimburse the county for its required maintenance, or immediately upon the existence of any other health, safety or welfare problem within or without this Section at such site. 
(4)  Every person who places or maintains a newsrack upon, in or over any public right-of-way shall permanently affix to each newsrack the owner's name, address, and telephone number in a place where such legible information may be easily seen. 
(5)  It shall be deemed improper and without the county's permission for a newsrack to be placed on any public right-of- way unless each newsrack owner first obtains and maintains a general commercial liability insurance policy with limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), names the county as an additional named insured, and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the county, its officers, employees and agents from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack located upon, in or over a public right-of-way. Each newsrack owner shall provide the risk department with a current copy of the certificate of insurance prior to placing a newsrack on any public right-of-way. 
(6)  Newsracks shall be regularly stocked with newspapers, periodicals or other publications by the owner. Newsracks which remain empty for seven (7) or more consecutive days shall be considered abandoned and must be removed by the owner. 
(7)  Every newsrack shall at all times remain in compliance with the standards and requirements imposed by this section. 
(8)  This section shall apply to any existing newsracks located on public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of enactment of this section. 
(c)  Enforcement. It shall be a violation of this section to install or maintain any newsrack which fails to comply with any standards and requirements of this section. 
(1)  Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, after notice as set forth below, shall be removed and stored in any convenient place by the county administrator or any person designated by same. The owner of any newsrack found to be in violation of this section shall be given informal notice of the violation and fourteen (14) days within which to correct the violation. In the event the violation is not corrected within fourteen (14) days, formal written notice, mailed return receipt requested, shall be given to the person designated pursuant to Standards and Requirements subsection four (4). Said notice shall give the owner the option, within fourteen (14) days, either to cure the violation or to file a written request for a hearing before the code enforcement special magistrate in reference to such alleged violation. A hearing so requested shall be granted as a matter of right. 
If a written request for a hearing is filed within the aforementioned formal fourteen-day period, said request shall operate as a stay on the fourteen-day compliance or removal period until such time as the code enforcement special magistrate has held a hearing on the alleged violation and rendered a decision thereon. Any owner dissatisfied with the code enforcement special magistrate's decision may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. After removal of the newsracks, the owner shall again be given written notice thereof. Upon failure of the owner, following such notice, to claim the newsrack and pay a removal fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) within thirty (30) days after notice, except where a timely appeal of the code enforcement special magistrate's decision has been filed, the newsrack shall be deemed unclaimed property in possession of the county and may be disposed of pursuant to law. 
(2)  In the event of an emergency where the installation , use or maintenance of any newsrack poses an imminent or immediate health or safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, in the event a newsrack has been deemed abandoned by the county, or in the event an owner's name, address, and telephone number are not placed on the newsrack in accordance with standards and requirements subsection four (4), the county administrator or any person designated by same may summarily and temporarily remove such newsrack. Immediately following removal of any newsrack under these procedures, the owner, if identified, shall be provided written notice of the action and the nature of the emergency or violation necessitating such action. Upon failure of the owner following such written notice, to claim the newsrack and pay a removal fee of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) within thirty (30) days after notice, the newsrack shall be deemed unclaimed property in possession of the county and may be disposed of pursuant to law. The owner of any newsrack may file a written request for a hearing before the code enforcement special magistrate after an emergency removal if the written request is provided within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the removal notification. The owner of a newsrack may claim and take possession of the newsrack prior to the hearing. A hearing so requested shall be granted as a matter of right. Any owner dissatisfied with the decision at such hearing may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction . 
(3)  This section may also be enforced in accordance with any provision allowed by law. 
(4)  This section [of Ordinance No. 2016-029] shall take effect upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2016-029, §§ I—III, 9-13-16) 
Sec. 3-6-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-071, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 2005, repealed § 3-6-6, which pertained to the director of public works being authorized to permit obstructions and encroachments in public easements and derived from Ord. No. 87-49, §§ 1—5, adopted Dec. 8, 1987; and Ord. No. 89-1, §§ 1—5, adopted Jan. 17, 1989. 
Secs. 3-6-7—3-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION; IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2021-009, §§ 3, 4, adopted March 9, 2021, repealed the former div. 1, §§ 3-6-21—3-6-25, and set out provisions intended for use as a new div. 1, §§ 3-6-21(1)—3-6-21(27). In order to preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as div. 1, §§ 3-6-21—3-6-35.12. The former div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 74-3, §§ 1, 5, adopted Jan. 22, 1974; Ord. No. 75-3, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 1975; Ord. No. 78-37, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 26, 1978; Ord. No. 80-18, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 9, 1980; Ord. No. 82-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1982; Ord. No. 86-47, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 1986; Ord. No. 88-24, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 26, 1988; Ord. No. 88-38, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 19, 1988; and Ord. No. 07-018, § 1, adopted April 24, 2007. 

Sec. 3-6-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations governing activities taking place in county rights-of-way or easements, including, but not limited to, the location, installation, repair or modification of any facility. Such regulations are necessary in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Charlotte County. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-22. - Applicability. 
The regulations in this article shall apply to all private contractors, private citizens, utility companies, municipalities, and to any person or group proposing to install, construct, maintain, or repair any facility or structure within any of the existing or planned county rights-of-way or easements, whether created by dedication by plat or by recorded conveyance. This article shall apply to and be enforced in all areas of county jurisdiction, including county rights-of-way or easements located in a municipality. Other provisions of this Code that may also be applicable to activities in the right-of-way include, but are not limited to, sections 1-10-287, 1-10-288 and chapter 3-6, article II, division 2. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Clear zone shall mean the area that is ten (10) feet in width, as measured from the edge of the pavement, or an area whose width is determined in accordance with the latest edition of the State of Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Standard Design Manual, whichever width area is greater. 
Dedicated, but not accepted for maintenance shall mean a public roadway dedicated by plat that has not been accepted by the county for maintenance, as authorized in F.S. § 177.081(3), as may be amended from time to time. 
Developed property shall mean property upon which any structure has been constructed or placed regardless of whether such structure is used, completed, or occupied. Lots located within community redevelopment areas ("CRAs") that no longer contain a structure, but that contained a structure after the date the relevant community redevelopment plan was adopted or last amended, whichever date is later, shall be considered developed lots for purposes of this definition. 
Drainage easement shall mean land in which the public or the county has an easement devoted to, planned, proposed or required for use as a public drainage system. 
Emergency repairs shall mean work necessary to protect and preserve life and property of inhabitants of the county and are needed to be completed immediately. 
Facility, for purposes of this article, shall mean a structure which has been or is being placed and maintained along, across, on or under any public right-of-way or public easement within the jurisdiction of the county, including, but not limited to, any electric lines, telephone lines, cables, poles, ditches, sewers, water lines, gas lines, wells, fences, gasoline tanks and pumps, irrigation, landscaping, signage or specialty paving. 
Right-of-way shall mean land in which the county owns the fee or has a platted or conveyed easement devoted to or required for use by the public. Rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, roads, canals, and drainage conveyances. 
Road shall mean streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways and other ways opened or unopened to travel by the public, including the roadbed, right-of-way, and all culverts, drains, sluices, ditches, water storage areas, waterways, embankments, slopes, retaining walls, bridges, tunnels and viaducts necessary for the maintenance of travel. 
Structure shall mean any construction or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. "Structure" includes "building," as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground or requiring construction or erection on or under the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-24. - Right-of-way permit required. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 3-6-25, it shall be unlawful for any person, municipal corporation, special district, or any other legal entity to construct, install, remove, revise, alter, or modify any structure, facility, or topographic feature on any land, right-of-way or easement owned by the county, or any right-of-way dedicated to the public, without first having obtained a permit from the county. Activities requiring a permit include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Installation, re-installation or resurfacing of driveways; 
(2)  Installation of culvert pipe; 
(3)  All activities requiring temporary access across the ROW, including, but not limited to, house moving, swimming pool construction, septic system installation; 
(4)  All storm water drainage facilities and associated work, including, but not limited to, swale grading; 
(5)  All overhead or underground utility installation, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water lines, electric conductors, conduit, cable television, and communication devices; 
(6)  Sod and landscaping installation; 
(7)  Temporary material or equipment storage; and 
(8)  Pavement construction or repair. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-25. - Exemptions from permitting requirement. 
(a)  No right-of-way permit is required for the following activities in county rights-of-way or easements: 
(1)  Trimming, cutting, or maintenance of trees, shrubs, and other existing vegetation, provided such activities comply with chapter 3-9, article IV of this Code. 
(2)  Mailboxes, provided said mailboxes comply with all federal, state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-26. - Items and activities prohibited in the ROW and clear zone 
(a)  The following items and activities are prohibited in county rights-of-way and easements: 
(1)  Structures, facilities, landscaping, or any other item for which no ROW permit has been issued; 
(2)  Irrigation pipes or sprinklers; 
(3)  Non-frangible structures, temporary or permanent, located in the clear zone adjacent to the roadway; and 
(4)  Any other activity that, in the opinion of the county engineer, is either unnecessary or impedes drainage. 
(b)  Whenever the county becomes aware of unpermitted items in the right-of-way, the owner, if known, will be provided a notice that the item must be removed by the date stated in the notice, and such date shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Upon failure of an owner to remove the item by the date specified in the notice, or where the owner of the unpermitted item is unknown, the county may remove the item and may pursue recovery of its costs by any legal means. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-27. - Legal status. 
(a)  Permits issued by the county pursuant to this article constitute a license for permissive use only. The placing of facilities upon public rights-of-way pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this Code shall not operate to create or to vest any property rights in the holder thereof. The issuance of a right-of-way permit does not relieve the permit holder of the need for obtaining any other permits or approvals that may be required by the appropriate authorities. 
(b)  The rights and privileges in this article are granted to the permit holder only to the extent of the county's right, title, and interest in the land to be entered upon and used by the applicant, and the applicant at all times assumes all risks of, and agrees to defend the county from and against, any and all loss, damage, costs, or expense arising in any manner on account of the exercise or attempted exercise by the applicant of the rights granted under the permit. 
(c)  The permittee's activities in the right-of-way shall not interfere with or encroach upon the property or rights of a prior permitted occupant of the right-of-way and shall not unnecessarily restrict the activities of the traveling public. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-28. - Permit and other fees. 
(a)  All fees required by this division shall be established by the board of county commissioners by resolution. 
(b)  If work in the ROW occurs without an approved, required permit, the violator(s) shall be required to pay quadruple the regular fee for the application appropriate for that activity, in addition to any code violation penalties. The county reserves the right to deny the application and require the ROW to be restored to its previous condition. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-29. - Permit application. 
(a)  All permit applications shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fee and shall be submitted to the building division of the community development department, or submitted electronically, on the approved county permit application form and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's and local agent's name, address, email address, telephone and facsimile numbers, and license number. 
(2)  Scaled, dated drawings showing the type, location, and all dimensions of the proposed project or installation and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities, provided, however, that the county engineer shall have the authority to waive this requirement for minor work activities. 
(3)  A maintenance of traffic plan that is consistent with the county's maintenance of traffic regulations, the uniform manual of uniform traffic control devices, and/or a specific FDOT 600 Series for safety of the public and employees of the permittee. 
(4)  For any proposed underground installation, information in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.  The type of the utility facility to be installed. 
b.  The proposed method of installation (for example, open cut or directional bore). 
c.  The location, depth, size and quantity of existing or proposed ducts or conduits that will contain the facilities being installed. 
d.  A description of the construction methods or techniques that will be used for the installation. 
e.  A construction schedule and anticipated completion date. 
(5)  A list of all subcontractors who will be performing work in the right-of-way, including type of license held and license number. 
(6)  Where the permit activity involves connecting a private road to a county road, drainage plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. A set of signed and sealed plans prepared by a professional engineer shall be submitted with the application for review by the county. 
(7)  Where the proposed work includes pavement construction and/or intersection improvements (except in connection with permits for new driveways or modifications to existing driveways), detailed construction drawings must be submitted to the engineering division of the public works department for review and approval. Plans will need to be signed and sealed by a professional engineer when appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-30. - Duration of right-of-way permits. 
Permits for work in county rights-of-way or easements are valid only for the time period specified by the county in the permit. The county reserves the right to limit the duration of a right-of-way permit to what is reasonable and customary for the type of work being performed. If the work for which the permit was issued is not completed within the specified time period, the permittee can request one (1) permit extension, at the county's discretion and at no charge provided, however, that permit extensions will not be granted where the permit has expired. Expired permits where work has been performed but not completed shall be considered to be a violation of this Code. Permit extensions will be considered on a case by case basis. Permits that are not activated within a six (6) month period from the date of issuance will expire and a new permit application must be submitted. No refunds of permit fees will be processed for permits that expire. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-31. - Permit special conditions. 
For permits involving pavement construction and/or intersection improvements a development agreement must be executed by the permit applicant prior to construction. In addition, a surety or cash bond, in an amount that is equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the total cost of the work within the right-of-way, must be submitted to the public works department. The cash or surety bond must be in a form that is acceptable to the county attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-32. - Permits issued in error. 
The county engineer reserves the right to rescind any permit that was issued in error, including, but not limited to, permits issued based on a misrepresentation in the permit application. Relevant factors for consideration include, but are not limited to, the length of time that has passed since the permit issuance, the effect on the permit applicant, and safety considerations. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-33. - Qualifications of permittee. 
(a)  Right-of-way permits will only be issued to the following: 
(1)  Utility corporations or companies (including county and municipal utilities) that will own and be servicing the installed facilities, provided, however, that communications services providers, communications facility providers, and pass-through providers must be registered as provided in section 3-6-38 of this Code as it may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  Licensed contractors responsible for the installation of any utility facility or structure that is subject to these regulations. 
(3)  Private citizens, corporations, or organizations with a reasonable and legitimate purpose in using the right-of-way, which purpose, in the sole opinion of the county engineer, poses no threat or danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(4)  Authorized representatives of any of the foregoing. 
(b)  In instances where the services to be provided are subject to county regulations relating to underground utility pipelines, the applicant must be a holder of a current active general contractor's license, a current active underground utility contractor license, a current active plumbing contractor's license or, for fire protection systems only, a certificate issued by the state fire marshal. Any subcontractors retained by the applicant must also be properly licensed for the type of work being performed. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-34. - Design and construction standards. 
(a)  Sidewalks/bike facilities. It is the expressed policy of the board of county commissioners that sidewalks and bike facilities are an integral part of the county's transportation system. Therefore, all site development projects located on arterials and collector roadways will be required to install sidewalks and bike facilities as part of any site development plan. If there are cases where connectivity of a sidewalk or bike network requires that adequate facilities be provided along the frontage of a roadway classified as local or residential, the county engineer may require that these facilities be provided. The requirements of this section may be waived by the county engineer for developments of four (4) standard size building lots or less, or if the county engineer determines that a sidewalk or bike facility is not required because adequate facilities already exist. It is recognized that there will be situations that exist which affect the ability of a developer to comply with the requirements of this section. Therefore, the county engineer may alter or delete the requirements of this section if, in the determination of the county engineer, some physical or topographical feature prevents or seriously restricts the capability for the sidewalk or bike facility to be included with the project. 
(b)  All facilities installed in the public right-of-way shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the county's "Engineering Design and Construction Standards." Such design and construction standards shall be adopted and amended by the board of county commissioners by resolution. 
(c)  "Open cut" installation is only permitted under special circumstances as determined by county. 
(d)  Torpedoes, missiles and other similar underground tunneling devices are not permitted in the right-of-way. Directional drilling and Jack and Bore are the only acceptable methods of tunneling installation of underground facilities in the right-of-way. Bore logs must be submitted by the permittee to the appropriate department(s) upon completion of the work. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35. - Coordination of work with county roadway construction. 
The county may require utility installation or maintenance activities in the right-of-way to be coordinated with planned roadway construction or maintenance or to be delayed in order to minimize disruption of use of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.1. - Hours of work. 
All work under a right-of-way permit shall only be performed between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, unless otherwise approved by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.2. - Maintenance of traffic. 
All roadways, sidewalks, and bike/multi-use paths within the limits of a right-of-way permit shall be kept open to all traffic by the permittee. When approved by the county engineer, traffic may be temporarily bypassed over an approved detour route. Permittees shall furnish, erect and maintain barricades, warning signs, delineators, flaggers, or pilot cars in accordance with county maintenance of traffic regulations and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Florida Department of Transportation. The permittee shall also provide and maintain, in a safe condition, temporary approaches or crossing and intersections with trails, roads, streets, businesses, parking lots, residences, garages and farms. The permittee shall bear all expenses for maintaining the traffic over the section of road involved in the construction and for constructing and maintaining such approaches, crossings, intersections and other features deemed necessary by the county engineer. Materials stored at the site of the work shall be stored outside the clear zone and shall be so placed as to not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. All maintenance of traffic activities shall be in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.3. - Restoration of right-of-way. 
(a)  Upon completion of construction, the county right-of-way shall be restored by the permittee to the same or better condition than existed before the commencement of the work. Failure of the permittee to promptly restore the right-of-way shall constitute consent for the county to perform such restoration at the permittee's expense. 
(b)  Where any work performed by a permittee disturbs any area outside of the roadway, the permittee shall ensure that the area is completely restored in a manner acceptable to the county. Any sod that is removed shall be replaced with the same type of sod. All areas must be sodded unless the county engineer approves an alternative. Any trees or shrubbery that were previously permitted and are damaged by permittee during construction shall be replaced by permittee at permittee's sole expense. Any existing utilities that are damaged, destroyed or temporarily removed by the permittee shall be replaced or repaired by the permittee at permittee's sole expense. 
(c)  All restoration work shall be warranted by the permittee for a period of one (1) year. Permittee shall be obligated to make all warranty repairs at no cost to the county. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.4. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of any work under a right-of-way permit, the permittee shall provide the county's risk management division with proof of insurance as described below. Such proof shall be contained in a certificate of insurance issued by the permittee's insurer, listing coverages and limits, expiration dates, terms of the policy, and all endorsements. If requested by risk management, a certified copy of each policy, including all endorsements, shall be provided. 
(b)  Required insurance shall remain in effect during the term of any permitted use of the right-of-way. The certificate of insurance shall verify that the insurance policy(ies) has (have) been issued to the permittee, covering claims for personal/bodily injury, including death, and property damage arising from the construction, placement, and maintenance of the facilities in the right-of-way. 
(c)  Required insurance coverages are: comprehensive general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, independent contractor, contractual, premises/operations, products and personal injury covering the liability assumed by the permittee. Limits of liability for personal injury and/or bodily injury, including death, and property damage may have combined limits of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence; coverage shall be on an "occurrence" basis. 
(d)  If a permittee is self-insured or maintains a policy deductible of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or more, the permittee shall provide a current certified financial statement. If, in county's sole discretion, the permittee's financial status would make it difficult for permittee to pay any claim that may arise from permittee's activities in the right-of-way, county may require permittee to purchase a specific policy of insurance for the proposed work. 
(e)  The Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners shall be designated as an additional insured on all required insurance policies. 
(f)  The county shall be designated as a certificate holder and shall be provided with thirty (30) days' prior notice of any expiration, cancellation, non-renewal, or any material change in coverage or limits. Notice shall be furnished by certified mail to the county's risk management division. 
(g)  Companies issuing insurance policies to permittees shall have no recourse against the county for payment of premiums, assessments, or deductibles. Payment of same shall be the sole responsibility and risk of the permittee. 
(h)  The requirements of this section may be waived, in whole or in part, by the county engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.5. - Indemnification. 
The permittee, in consideration of the benefits derived by the granting of a permit for use of the county right-of-way, shall, at all times and for itself and its employees, agents and invitees, assume all risks and shall indemnify, defend, and save Charlotte County, its officers and employees, harmless from all loss, damages, costs or expense arising in any manner out of the exercise or attempted exercise of permittees acts or omissions when locating its facilities in the county right-of-way pursuant to a right-of-way permit. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.6. - Relocation. 
(a)  Any permitted facility heretofore or hereafter placed upon, under, over, or along any public road right-of-way or easement that, in the opinion of the county, unreasonably interferes in any way with the convenient, safe, or continuous use, or the maintenance, improvement, extension or expansion of such public road or appurtenant structures thereto shall, upon ninety (90) days' written notice to the owner of the facility or its agent, be removed or relocated, and the right-of-way shall be restored to its original condition by, and at the sole expense of, such facility owner or its agent. The failure of a utility owner or its agent to remove or relocate such facility shall result in the removal or relocation of the facility and the owner or agent shall be liable for the cost of such removal or relocation. 
(b)  If the permittee or owner of any utility fails to commence removal or relocation of its facilities within the time specified by the county, or if the permittee or owner fails to timely complete such removal, including all associated restoration of the right-of-way, the county shall have all rights of action specified in F.S. § 337.403, as it may be amended from time to time, including, but not limited to, removal of the facilities at the permittee's or owner's costs and expense, by another entity, county forces or its contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.7. - Abandoned facilities. 
(a)  A permittee may not abandon a facility located in the public right-of-way without the prior approval of the county engineer. The permittee will be required to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility, at the permittee's sole expense. 
(b)  If a permittee fails, within a reasonable period of time, to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility after notification by the county, the county may perform such removal and recover the costs of removal from the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.8. - Responsibilities of adjacent property owners. 
(a)  Property owners shall be responsible for mowing of all grassy areas of the right-of-way adjacent to their developed property. Property owners shall keep all shrubbery and other foliage on their property trimmed and pruned so that it does not encroach on the right-of-way and cause a traffic or safety hazard as determined by the county engineer or designee. Adjacent property owners shall not place any items in the right-of-way adjacent to their property without first obtaining a permit or a determination by the county that a permit is not required. There is a rebuttable presumption that any plantings or other items located in the right-of-way have been put there by the adjacent property owner. This presumption shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent owners of the adjacent property. Additionally, property owners shall be responsible for perpetual, safe maintenance as necessary of any item within the right-of-way adjacent to their property that the county has not installed and for which there is no valid written agreement stating otherwise, and property owners assume all responsibility for any damages that occur as a result of the property owner's negligence or failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Property owners shall be responsible to keep their driveways, including portions of driveways within the county right-of-way or easement, in a proper state of repair and maintain such areas to be free from hazardous conditions. Property owners shall maintain their driveways in such a manner as to provide safe conditions for vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. If a property owner fails to meet the requirements of this section, the county may take appropriate action and may assess the owner of the property for costs incurred by the county for the action taken. If the owner fails to reimburse the county within thirty (30) days after being notified of the costs, the county may take any legal action against the owner to recover the sums expended by the county in addition to any other remedies available by law. 
(c)  A property owner shall immediately notify the county of any observed unsafe condition of a sidewalk, or other object in the right-of-way adjacent to their property. If an owner's actions or inactions caused the unsafe condition, the owner shall take appropriate action to remedy the unsafe condition. If the owner's actions or inactions caused the unsafe condition and the owner fails to take corrective action, the county shall take appropriate action and may assess the owner of the property for costs incurred by the county for the action taken. If the owner fails to reimburse the county within thirty (30) days after being notified of the costs, the county may take any legal action against the owner to recover the sums expended by the county in addition to any other remedies available by law. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.9. - Emergency work 
(a)  The county's ROW division shall be notified, as soon as practicable under the circumstances, of any event involving facilities in the right-of-way that necessitates immediate emergency repair work. The facility's owner may proceed to take whatever action is necessary in order to respond to the emergency. The owner will be required to obtain an "after-the-fact" permit within five (5) business days after the emergency work was begun, and the owner must submit revised "as-built" drawings, if applicable. 
(b)  In the event that the county becomes aware of an emergency regarding an owner's facilities located in the right-of-way, an attempt to contact the owner will be made. The county may take whatever reasonable action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner whose facilities necessitated the emergency actions. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.10. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required inspections, as indicated in the right-of-way permit, shall be scheduled by notifying the engineering division and/or permit office. There is no right to an immediate inspection. The following inspections are required in all instances, as applicable: 
(1)  Line and grade inspection for driveway. 
(2)  Driveway pre-pour footer inspection. (Clear pictures submitted to inspector can alleviate this inspection.) 
(3)  Pipe inspection, including outfall, while being installed and before cover, catch basin (pre-pour). 
(4)  Inspection of utility placement in their mandated corridors as shown in Detail Sheet R-17.1 sheets 1,2, and 3 as incorporated into the engineering design and construction standards as they may be amended from time to time. 
(5)  Inspection of temporary erosion control placements in the right-of-way. (This inspection can be done at any time and at multiple times during a project.) 
(6)  Inspection to ensure no drainage is being blocked within the right-of-way. 
(7)  Inspection of backfill compaction reports, base material limerock bearing ratio (LBR) reports, concrete mix designs and break reports, asphaltic concrete mix designs, and proper signing and striping may be required. 
(8)  Final inspection. 
(b)  Any inspections required and/or requested in addition to those listed above will be scheduled and performed only after payment of an additional inspection fee. No final inspections or release of bond will be approved until all re-inspection fees have been paid. Upon satisfactory final inspection, the engineering department shall transmit a release to the Charlotte County Building Department. No permanent power hookups or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building department until the appropriate release is obtained from the engineering division. 
(c)  Layout of work. Utilizing the control points furnished, all horizontal and vertical controls shall be established by the permittee as necessary to construct the work in conformance with the plans and specifications. The work shall include performing all calculations required and setting all stakes needed, such as grade stakes, offset stakes, reference point stakes, slope stakes, and other reference marks or points necessary to provide lines and grades for construction of all roadway, bridge, and miscellaneous items. 
(d)  At any time during construction, the county shall have the right to inspect a permittee's work in the right-of-way to ensure that it conforms to applicable county standards for such construction. If, at any time during construction, the county observes that the construction does not conform to county standards and any additional requirements of the right-of-way permit, the county engineer may issue an order to the permittee to correct any non-conforming work, and shall have the authority and power to suspend or stop work until it is corrected. After an order to suspend or stop work has been issued, it shall be unlawful for the permittee, its employees or agents, to proceed with the construction until the county engineer authorizes same. Failure to correct any deficient work may result in revocation of the permit. 
(e)  Work within the right-of-way that does not comply with the approved plans and permit, may be immediately stopped by the county in the following instances: 
(1)  In an emergency situation that may have a serious effect on health, safety or welfare; or 
(2)  When, in the reasonable opinion of the county engineer or designee, irreversible or irreparable harm may result and immediate cessation of the work is necessary to protect the public or the right-of-way. In such instance, notice shall be given, in writing, to the owner, permittee, or agent by the county engineer or designee, stating the conditions under which work may be resumed. Verbal notice shall be sufficient in emergency situations but shall be followed up by written notice. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.11. - Surety bond. 
(a)  If the building department approves a certificate of occupancy prior to completion of work in the right-of-way or easement, a CASH bond is required for any uncompleted work in the right-of-way or easement. 
(b)  The posting of a bond does not relieve the permit holder from the responsibility of completing the required work. 
(c)  The amount of the bond must be one hundred ten (110) percent of the estimated cost of the work to be completed in the ROW, as approved by the engineering division. The bond shall specify the maximum time limit, as established by the engineering division, for completion of the work. Upon completion of all work in the right-of-way or easement, the permit holder shall notify the engineering division. The engineering division will then perform a final inspection and, if said inspections are satisfactory, the engineering division will authorize release of the bond. 
(d)  When the permit holder fails to complete the work in the right-of-way or easement within the prescribed time period, the engineering division will make inspections to determine the amount of work remaining to be completed, and notify the permit holder that the work in the right-of-way or easement must be completed within seven (7) days or the bond will be forfeited. If the work in the right-of-way or easement is not completed in the seven (7) day period, the permittee forfeits the bond and work in the right-of-way or easement maybe completed by the county, or its agent. Any surplus amount remaining after the work is completed will be returned to the permit holder or individual who posted the bond. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
Sec. 3-6-35.12. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  Variances. A variance from the requirements of this article may be granted by the county engineer when the granting of a variance will not be contrary to the public interest and when a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance will not be granted to serve as a convenience or based solely on economic hardship, or when the applicant caused the condition leading to the request for a variance. When determining whether to grant a variance, the county engineer shall consider the following, where applicable: 
(1)  The extent to which a proposed alternate design meets specific adopted design standards. 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed design meets the spirit and intent of the adopted design manual through the use of materials, design criteria, and engineering, that protects the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. 
(3)  The positive or negative impact of the proposed design on surrounding property uses and property values, in comparison to the expected impact of the facilities if same were built in strict conformity with the standards of the design manual. 
(4)  The extent to which the proposed design accomplishes the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a decision of the county engineer in the permitting, enforcement, or interpretation of any of the terms or provisions of this article may appeal such decision to the county administrator. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written notice with the county engineer within twenty (20) days after the decision of the county engineer. Such written notice shall state, with particularity, the factual and/or legal basis for the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2021-009, § 4, 3-9-21) 
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 3-6-36. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of the county to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the placement and maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the county; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including, but not limited to, F.S. § 337.401, as may be amended from time to time; the Communications Act of 1934, as amended; and other state and federal laws; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way by communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating the county right-of-way, the county shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-37. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined shall be construed to have the common and ordinary meaning. 
Abandonment means the permanent cessation of the use of a communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. It may also mean the discontinued use of obsolete technology in favor of new technology, which would require the removal of the discontinued, abandoned technology. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services. 
Applicant means any person, firm, partnership or corporation who submits an application to the county for a permit to locate a communications facility in the right-of-way and is a wireless provider. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction or property or injury to persons, and the regulations and design standards contained in this division. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one (1) or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. 
Communications facility or system means any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathways placed or maintained, or to be placed or maintained, upon, under, over, or along any public rights-of-way of the county and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. This includes any facility that may be used to provide communications services. Multiple cables, conduits, strands, or fibers located within the same conduit shall be considered one (1) communications facility. 
Communications facility provider means a person who is engaged, directly or indirectly, in the business of leasing, licensing, subleasing, subletting or hiring, to one (1) or more communications service providers, all or a portion of the tangible personal property used in a communications facility, including, but not limited to, towers, poles, tower space, antennae, transmitters, and transmission lines placed or maintained upon, under, over, or along any public rights-of-way of the county. Provisions of this division that apply only to communications facility providers shall not apply to communications services providers, even if the communication services provider also operates, licenses, leases, subleases, or sublets communications facilities. 
Communications services shall be as defined in F.S. § 202.11(1). 
Communications services provider means any person, including a municipality or county, providing communications services through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. communications services provider shall also include any person, including a municipality or county that places or maintains a communications facility in public rights-of-way but does not provide communications services. 
Communications services tax means the local communications services tax authorized to be levied and collected by counties and municipalities upon charges for communications services pursuant to F.S. § 202.19. 
County means Charlotte County, Florida. 
Dealer means a person registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of communications services in this state. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way means in, on over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility having dimensions not larger than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width, and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Pass-through provider includes any person (other than a communications services provider) who places or maintains a communications facility in the road or rights-of-way of a municipality or county that levies a tax pursuant to F.S. ch. 202, and who does not remit taxes imposed by that municipality or county pursuant to F.S. ch. 202, as per F.S. § 337.401, as may be amended from time to time. A pass-through provider does not provide communications services to retail customers in the county. Provisions in this division that apply only to pass-through providers shall not apply to communications services providers that provide the services identical or similar to those provided by Pass-through providers. 
Person includes any individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the county to the extent the county acts as a communications services provider. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining means to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate, or relocate under, over, or along any public rights-of-way of the county. A person that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way means a public right-of-way, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the county is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property or easements over private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal county-owned property except as described above and shall not include county buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant means a communications services provider or pass-through provider that has registered with the county in accordance with the provisions of section 3-6-38 of this division and holds an effective registration. 
Registration or register means the process described in this division whereby a communications services provider, communications facilities provider or pass-through provider submits certain information to the county as more fully described herein. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both the following qualifications: 
(a)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennae that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume; and 
(b)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure fifteen (15) feet in height or less unless the County grants a waiver for such pole. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: 
(a)  The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; 
(b)  Wireline backhaul facilities; or 
(c)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means a person certificated by the Florida Public Service Commission (FPSC) to provide telecommunications service in the state and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-38. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registration application and all information required therein shall be included in any permit application required by section 3-6-40 of this Code. 
(b)  A communications services provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the county shall first register with the county in accordance with this division. This division provides no right of access to the public rights-of-way for (i) persons other than communications services providers, or (ii) businesses other than those providing communications services. Other uses of the public rights-of-way reasonably related to the provision of communications services may be allowed in the reasonable discretion of the county. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this division, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(c)  A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this division governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes, or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a registrant from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the county's or another person's or business's facilities. Registration does not excuse a registrant from complying with all applicable county ordinances, codes or regulations, including this division. 
(d)  Each communications services provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility, including without limitation, a co-location, in public rights-of-way in the county, shall file an application for a single registration with the county which shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the registrant; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the registrant's primary contact person and the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this division and acknowledgement that the registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this Division, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; and 
(4)  The number of the registrant's certificate of authorization or license to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission (PSC) or the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). A registrant proposing to place or maintain a wireless communications facility operating on a spectrum licensed by the FCC shall supply the file number of the FCC license authorizing such wireless service. 
(e)  Registration application fees: no registration application fees shall be imposed for registration under this division. 
(f)  The county shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the county administrator or his or her designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with subsection 3-6-38(d) above, the registration shall be effective and the county shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of the registration in writing. If the county determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection 3-6-38(d) above, the county shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness. The county shall respond to an application for registration within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provision of this division. An applicant has thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of non-effectiveness of registration to appeal the decision as provided in section 3-6-44 hereof. 
(g)  A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the county stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way within the county and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(h)  Registration does not in and of itself establish a right to place or maintain, or the priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the county but shall provide the registrant with the right to apply for a permit. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this division and are further subject to any additional county ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. 
(i)  A registrant shall renew its registration with the county's public works department by April 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this division, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even numbered year. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the county. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the county restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this division. 
(j)  An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-39. - Notice of transfer, sale, or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  If a registrant transfers, sells, or assigns its assets located in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale, or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer, or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this division. Written notice of any such transfer, sale, or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the county's public works department within twenty (20) days after the effective date of the transfer, sale, or assignment. If the transferee, buyer, or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer, or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer, or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer, or assignee shall register as provided in section 3-6-38 within sixty (60) days of the transfer, sale, or assignment. If permit applications are pending in the registrant's name, the transferee, buyer, or assignee shall notify the public works director that the transferee, buyer, or assignee is the new applicant after the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
(b)  The county does not have the right to approve or deny registrants' asset transfers or assignments to communications services providers operating at least one (1) communications facility within the county, and the failure to comply with this section does not void any such asset transfer or assignment. The county reserves the right to exclude persons or entities other than communications services providers or pass-through providers from its rights-of-way. Transfers or assignments of a communications facility to persons or entities other than a communications services provider or pass-through provider who will operate at least one (1) communications facility within the county requires compliance with this section to insure continued use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-40. - Permit application. 
(a)  A permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way shall include the following: 
(1)  The location of the proposed communications facility, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where the facilities are to be located, and the approximate size of the facilities that will be located in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Proposals to locate a new utility pole in the right-of-way shall include engineering documentation demonstrating why an existing utility pole is not better suited or feasible; 
(3)  A description of the manner in which the proposed communications facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods or techniques); 
(4)  If applicable, a statement indicating whether the proposed communications facility will permit co-location; 
(5)  A maintenance of traffic plan for any disruption of the public rights-of-way, in accordance with the standards promulgated by the Florida Department of Transportation; 
(6)  In order to assess the impact on right-of-way resources, effects on neighboring properties, and potential for co-locations or repurposed structures, the registrant shall provide information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, including information that identifies all above-ground and below ground structures including, but not limited to, light poles, power poles, equipment boxes, antennae, and underground water, sewer, electric and gas lines currently existing in the public rights-of-way in the county within a five hundred-foot radius of the proposed facility, if available (such information may be provided without certification as to accuracy, to the extent obtained from other registrants with facilities in the public rights-of-way). The five hundred-foot distance requirement may be modified if the county administrator, or designee, determines that the proposed location: (i) better serves the county's interests in safe, aesthetic, efficient and effective management of the public rights-of-way; (ii) is necessary to address a documented lack of capacity for one (1) or more carriers; or (iii) will help minimize the total number of communication facilities necessary to serve a particular area; 
(7)  A timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the county that will be affected; 
(8)  Whether all or any portion of the proposed facilities will be rented, hired, leased, sublet, or licensed from or to any third party and, if so, the identity, and contact information of the third party; 
(9)  If appropriate, given the facility proposed, a certified estimate of the cost of restoration for the public rights-of-way, subject to approval by the county engineer or designee; 
(10)  Such additional information as the county finds reasonably necessary, with respect to the placement or maintenance of the communications facility that is the subject of the permit application, to review such permit application. 
(b)  Within fourteen (14) days after the date of filing an application, the County may request that the proposed location of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative county utility pole or support structure. The county and the applicant may, for up to thirty (30) days after the date of the request, negotiate the alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment. If the alternative location cannot be agreed upon by the parties, the applicant must notify the county and the county must grant or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the date the application was filed. The request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-41. - Standards for placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  A registrant shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of state and federal law and county ordinances, codes, and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way, including, without limitation a co-location, until all applicable permits, if any, have been issued by the County or other appropriate authority, provided, however, that in the event of an emergency, a registrant may restore its damaged facilities in the right-of-way with facilities of the same size, character and quality, without first applying for or receiving a permit. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to thirty (30) small wireless facilities. 
(c)  The term "emergency" means a condition that affects the public's health, safety, or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. The registrant shall provide prompt notice to the county of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency and shall be required to obtain an after-the-fact permit if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work undertaken in public rights-of-way due to an emergency. The registrant acknowledges that, as a condition of granting such permits, the county may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement, relocation, or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. The county may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as routine maintenance and repair activities that may otherwise require individual permits. 
(d)  Communications facilities providers and pass-through providers understand and acknowledge that the county strongly favors strengthening utility infrastructure, in particular as it relates to flooding and hurricane-related events. Subject to any applicable regulatory approval, communications facility providers and pass-through providers will adopt and implement an infrastructure hardening plan for any facilities located within the county. 
(e)  To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the county shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional wireless support structures within a particular area of public rights-of-way. 
(f)  All communications facilities shall be placed or maintained so as not to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and with the rights and convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way, as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit, is required. The county engineer or designee may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way consistent with this division and other applicable law. 
(g)  All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(h)  The registrant shall notify the county prior to commencement of construction in the right-of-way and upon completion of the work. 
(i)  After the completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way, or each phase thereof, a registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-way to their original condition before such work. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within thirty (30) days, or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required under the circumstances, following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the county may perform restoration and charge the costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended. For twelve (12) months following the original completion of the work, the registrant shall guarantee its restoration work and shall correct, at its own expense, any restoration work that does not satisfy the requirements of this division. 
(j)  Removal or relocation, at the direction of the county, of a registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, as they may be amended. 
(k)  A permit from the county constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this Division, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(l)  A registrant shall maintain its communications facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law. 
(m)  For installations involving excavation in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. ch. 556, as it may be amended. 
(n)  The registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care, and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard worksite areas. 
(o)  Upon the request of the county, and as notified by the county of the other work, construction, installation, or repairs referenced below, a registrant may be required to coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation, or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable time frame in the subject public rights-of-way, and the registrant may be required to reasonably alter its placement or maintenance schedule as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. 
(p)  A registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities so that they interfere with, displace, damage, or destroy any facilities, including, but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables, or conduits of the county or any other entity's facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way. 
(q)  The county makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the county's public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities, and any performance of work, costs incurred, or services provided by the registrant shall be at the registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this division shall affect the county's authority to add, vacate, or abandon public rights-of-way, and the county makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated, or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(r)  The county shall have the right to make such inspections of communications facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(s)  A permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility in public rights-of-way shall include plans showing the location of the proposed installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the plans so provided require revision based upon actual installation, the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans. The plans shall be in a hard copy format or an electronic format specified by the county, provided such electronic format is maintained by the registrant. Such plans in a format maintained by the registrant shall be provided at no cost to the county. 
(t)  The county reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables, or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the county in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. The county further reserves, without limitation, the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed the grading, installation, relocation, or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the county and within said limits as same may, from time to time, be altered. Should the registrant be required to relocate its facilities in conjunction with such installation and alteration, the registrant shall be required to pay all costs associated with such relocation. 
(u)  A registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than thirty (30) days' advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. 
(v)  A small wireless facility that is a portion of a communication facility, such as an antenna which is attached to a legally maintained vertical structure in the public rights-of-way, such as a light pole or utility pole ("vertical structure(s)"), shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Such small wireless facilities may not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the vertical structure; 
(2)  Small wireless facilities located on new or existing utility poles may be required to locate equipment other than the antenna (such as meter boxes) at a location separate from the utility pole. This requirement may be waived by the county upon a showing that such a requirement is not reasonably compatible for the particular location or that the requirement imposes an excessive expense to the applicant. 
(3)  The county may require stealth design and color matching of small wireless facilities in areas where the county has provided facilities such as decorative light poles and other streetscape enhancements. This requirement may be waived by the county upon a showing that such a requirement is not reasonably compatible for the particular location or that the requirement imposes an excessive expense to the applicant. 
(4)  The height for a new utility pole erected to support a small wireless facility is limited to the tallest utility pole located in the same right-of-way and that existed on July 1, 2017 measured from grade in place within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location of the new utility pole. If there is not a utility pole within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed location, the height of the new utility pole shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Such wireless facilities shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, state, or local rule, regulation, or law. 
(6)  Such wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable Federal Communications Commission Emissions Standards. 
(7)  The design, construction, and installation of wireless facilities shall comply with any applicable local building codes. 
(8)  No commercial advertising shall be allowed on wireless facilities. 
(9)  Any accessory equipment and related housing in the public rights-of-way that are used in conjunction with such a wireless facility shall comply with any applicable local rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws governing the placement and design of such equipment. 
(10)  The rate to collocate small wireless facilities on a county utility pole shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per pole annually. 
(w)  Vertical structures, such as towers, whose sole purpose is to serve as a mounting device for antennae, are expressly prohibited from being located in any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-42. - Permit review. 
(a)  Within fourteen (14) days after receiving an application, the county will determine and notify the applicant by electronic mail whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the county will specifically identify the missing information and allow the applicant to submit the missing information. If the county fails to notify the applicant of deficiencies within fourteen (14) days after receiving the application, the application will be deemed complete. 
(b)  The county will process all applications in the same manner. A complete application will be deemed approved if the county fails to approve or deny the application within sixty (60) days of receipt. The application review period may be extended upon mutual agreement of the parties. 
(c)  A permit issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain effective for one (1) year unless extended by the county. 
(d)  The county will notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. If the application is denied, the county shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial was based. An applicant may cure the deficiencies and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. The county shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application shall be deemed approved. 
(e)  The county may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
(1)  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
(2)  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
(3)  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(4)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual. 
(5)  Fails to comply with applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-43. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  The county may suspend a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(b)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this division, or other applicable county ordinances, codes, or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the county; 
(d)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of the registration; or 
(e)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the county. 
(f)  The public works director shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violation of subsections (1) through (4) above, each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-44. - Appeals. 
Final, written decisions of the public works director or designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration, or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the public works director within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The county administrator shall hear the appeal. The hearing shall occur within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be rendered within twenty (20) days of the hearing. Upon correction of the grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-45. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The county may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  A federal or state authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide communications services; 
(2)  The registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way, and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or 
(3)  The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with section 3-6-50 of this division. 
(b)  Prior to termination, the registrant shall be notified, in writing, by the county engineer or designee. Said notice shall set forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including which of subsections (1) through (3) above is applicable as the reason therefor, and describing the proposed action of the county with respect thereto. The registrant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan satisfactory to the county engineer or designee to accomplish same. If the plan is rejected, the county engineer or designee shall provide written notice of such rejection to the registrant and shall make a recommendation to the county administrator regarding a decision as to termination of registration. A registrant shall be notified in writing of a decision by the county administrator to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven (7) days after the decision. 
(c)  In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: 
(1)  Notify the county of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or 
(2)  Provide the county with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply with this subsection (c), which determination of non-compliance is subject to appeal as provided in section 3-6-44, the county may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities or requiring the registrant, within ninety (90) days of the termination, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the registrant, to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to their original condition before the removal. 
(d)  In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the communications facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way of the county safe. 
(e)  In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not authorize the county to cause the removal of communications facilities used to provide another service for which the registrant or another entity that owns or exercises physical control over the facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state agency, if required for provision of such service, and is registered with the county, if required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-46. - Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
A communications services provider with an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the county has sixty (60) days from the effective date of this division to comply with the terms of this division, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-47. - Insurance. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide, pay for, and maintain, satisfactory to the county, the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having a rating reasonably acceptable to the county. All liability policies shall provide that the county is an additional insured as to the activities under this division. The required coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by an authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the county annually. Thirty (30) days' advance written notice by registered, certified mail, or facsimile must be given to the county of any cancellation, intent not to renew, or reduction in the policy coverages. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the county. 
(b)  The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance: Workers' Compensation—Florida Statutory Requirements; Employer's Liability—One million dollar-limit each accident. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability bodily injury and property damage: One million dollar-combined single limit each occurrence. 
(3)  Automobile liability bodily injury and property damage: One million dollar-combined single limit each accident. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-48. - Indemnification. 
(a)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the county, it officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the county arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this division, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the county. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the county's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. The county agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the county receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the county from participating in the defense of any litigation utilizing its own counsel at its own cost if in the county's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida; or (2) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-49. - Surety bond. 
(a)  Prior to issuing a permit where the work under the permit will require restoration of public rights-of-way, the county may require a surety bond to secure proper performance under the requirements of any permits and the restoration of the public rights-of-way. Twelve (12) months after the completion of the restoration in public rights-of-way in accordance with the bond, the registrant may eliminate the bond. The county, however, may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent work in the public rights-of-way. The surety bond shall be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the county; shall be subject to the approval of the county attorney; and shall provide that: "For twelve (12) months after issuance of this bond, this bond may not be cancelled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the county, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(b)  The rights reserved by the county with respect to any surety bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the county may have under this division, or at law or equity. 
(c)  the rights reserved to the county under this section are in addition to all other rights of the county, whether reserved in this division, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the surety bond will affect any other right the county may have. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-50. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of a registrant's communications facility in the public right-of-way, the registrant shall notify the county, in writing, within ninety (90) days. Additionally, registrants shall comply with the provisions of subsection 3-6-38 relating to annual registration and updating of facilities. 
(b)  The county shall direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the county determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but not be limited to, a determination that such facility: (1) compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or during construction or maintenance activities in public rights-of-way; (2) prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or (3) creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way's use. In the event of (2) above, the county may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(c)  In the event that the county does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the county, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the county or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility within a reasonable period of time, as directed by the county, but not to exceed sixty (60) days, the county may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 3-6-51. - Pass-through provider and communications facility provider fees and charges. 
(a)  Pass-through providers and communications facility providers that place or maintain one (1) or more communications facilities upon, under, over, or along any public rights-of-way of the county shall pay the County the maximum annual amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401, as amended. For purposes of calculating payments hereunder, each separate pole or tower installed or maintained by a pass-through provider of communications facility provider for purposes of supporting antennas for other over-the-air radio transmission or reception equipment in the public rights-of-way shall comprise a separate communications facility subject to assessment of a separate permit fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile, or portion thereof, up to the maximum amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401, whichever is greater, to the extent that F.S. § 337.401, is applicable. 
(b)  The annual amount referenced in subsection 3-6-51 (a) above shall be due and payable on October 1 of every year. Fees not paid within ten (10) days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required by the county hereunder shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the county may have for additional sums due and payable or authorization to install any facilities in the county's right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-032, § 2, 6-27-17) 
Secs. 3-6-52—3-6-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF TOLL BRIDGE OPERATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 87-33, adopted Aug. 4, 1987, was not specifically amendatory of the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—8 thereof as Art. III, §§ 3-6-61—36-68, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 3-6-61. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-6-62. - Procedure for fixing tolls. 
(a)  Rates and tolls being charged and collected by a bridge company shall be changed only by approval of the board of county commissioners. The board shall, either upon request or upon its own motion, fix rates which are just, reasonable, compensatory, and not unfairly discriminatory. In every such proceeding, the board shall consider the value and quality of the service and the cost of providing the service, which shall include but not be limited to debt interest reasonably incurred for the operation of the bridge, the requirements of the bridge for working capital, maintenance, depreciation, tax and operating expenses incurred in the operation of all property used and useful in the public service, and a fair return on investment of the company in property used and useful in the public service. The board shall also consider the investment of the bridge company in property required by duly authorized governmental authority to be constructed in the public interest within a reasonable time in the future not to exceed twenty-four (24) months. 
(b)  In fixing rates, the board may determine the prudent costs of providing service during the period of time the rates will be in effect following the entry of a final order relating to the rate request of the utility and may use such costs to determine the revenue requirements that will allow the bridge company to earn a fair rate of return on its rate base. The measure of the value of property used and useful in the public service shall be the amount actually paid for installing the original bridge and equipment, plus additions, when first devoted to public service, minus any fraudulent, unwise or extravagant expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 2, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-62.1. - Formal investigation of bridge operating companies; subpoenas. 
(a)  Formal investigation. The board upon application from any interested person or upon its own motion may institute formal proceedings to investigate with respect to any toll bridge company, the financial history, structure and financial operations, the operating practices and procedures, the condition of any real property or structure or personal property used and useful in public service, and the financial and operational future planning for future service of the bridge to the motoring public. If during the course of any investigation under this section the board shall make a preliminary determination that there is probable cause to believe that rates and tolls in effect are excessive and may require reduction, and that the effect of any formal investigation or the findings thereof may be used in any later hearing for the reduction of tolls and rates, then the board shall make such findings after notice to the affected bridge company, and shall amend the title and nature of the investigation to constitute a rate review under this article. 
(b)  Subpoenas. In any proceeding or investigation under section 3-6-62 of this section, the board may issue subpoenas from the summoning of witnesses for their testimony or for the production of documents at deposition or in hearings before the board. Application for subpoenas shall be in writing signed by the attorney or designated representative for any party to a proceeding or investigation and shall be issued by the chairman of the board of county commissioners. Matters relating to the issuance and use of subpoenas shall be governed by section 1.410 as amended from time to time, of the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 88-23, §§ 1, 2, 7-19-88) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-23, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 19, 1988, adding subsections E and F to § 2 of Ord. No. 87-33, have been codified as § 3-6-62.1 herein at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 3-6-63. - Application fee. 
Applications by any company for a change of rates shall be accompanied by a fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), estimated to be the reasonable cost of auditing thereof by the county. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 3, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-63.1. - Annual regulatory fee. 
Every person or firm operating a toll bridge company in Charlotte County shall pay annually to the board of county commissioners on or before the first day of October a regulatory fee for the purpose of defraying the county expense of regulation including financial review and bridge inspection. The regulatory fee shall be equal to five (5) percent of the annual gross revenues derived from bridge tolls. "Annual gross revenues" for the purpose of this section means the greater of the amount reported by the company in its most recent annual report containing annual gross revenues for the company's most recently completed fiscal year, or the amount of company gross estimated by the county based upon the best evidence available, including counts of the bridge traffic, for the most recently completed calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 88-23, § 3, 7-19-88) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 88-23, § 3, adopted July 19, 1988, amended this article by adding provisions designated by the editor as § 3-6-63.1. 
Cross reference— Appropriations, § 1-10-349. 
Sec. 3-6-64. - Rate changes; due process. 
In any application for change of tolls or rates for any bridge company, the following minimum standards shall apply. 
(1)  Applications shall be in writing and include at least a statement of the rate base and the elements included in section 3-6-62, signed under oath by a company officer and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida, a statement of the net worth of the company audited and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida, a statement of the profits and losses and a statement in change of financial position of the company for the preceding fiscal year of the company audited and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida, and a signed and sworn statement by an officer of the company as to the traffic county of the number of pedestrians and vehicles passing over the bridge for a twelve-month period preceding the filing of the application. 
(2)  The board of county commissioners shall conduct no hearings nor take other action except for the setting of hearings for a period of ninety (90) days following the filing of the application by the company, in order to provide the county reasonable opportunity to inspect and audit the contents of the application and the books and records of the company. For good cause shown to the board of county commissioners by any county officer or employee or upon its own motion, the board may extend its audit period for a period of time reasonably necessary to conduct the tasks for which the extension is granted. 
(3)  No order for a change in tolls and rates shall be effective until after a public hearing conducted after fifteen (15) days' notice, published in a newspaper of local circulation. 
The board shall issue its written order authorizing a change in tolls and rates and tariffs within twenty (20) days of any final hearing on rates. 
(4)  Attorneys, accountants and other representatives of the county and the applicant may, during any proceeding related to rates, issue written interrogatories, take depositions, and otherwise make full discovery of the matters at issue in accord with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 4, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-65. - Annual reports required. 
Any company operating a causeway or bridge in Charlotte County charging tolls to the public shall file the following statements no later than April first of each year. 
(1)  A statement of the profits and losses for the preceding fiscal year of the company audited and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida. 
(2)  A statement of the net worth of the company audited and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida. 
(3)  A statement in change of financial position of the company for the preceding fiscal year of the company audited and certified by a certified public accountant licensed in Florida. 
(4)  A signed and sworn statement by an officer of the company as to the traffic count of the number of pedestrians and vehicles passing over the bridge for a twelve-month period preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)  A report of the physical inspection of the bridge, inspected by engineers competent and experienced in underwater and above water inspection and analysis of bridges in Florida. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 5, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-66. - Utility department reports. 
Between April first and June first of each year, the utility department shall report in writing to the board of county commissioners the department's analysis of physical inspection and financial reports submitted by any bridge company or shall report the failure of any bridge company to file reports required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 6, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-67. - Enforcement. 
Violation of this article is unlawful and punishable according to general law. The county may seek enforcement of the powers and duties in this article under the laws and rules of Florida related to injunction, civil procedure, and utility regulation. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 7, 8-4-87) 
Sec. 3-6-68. - Appeals. 
Appeals of any action of the board of county commissioners under this article shall be in accord with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure relating to final agency action by any county. 
(Ord. No. 87-33, § 8, 8-4-87) 
Secs. 3-6-69—3-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HIGHWAY ACCESS CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-36, adopted May 31, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—9 as Ch. 3-6, Art. IV, §§ 3-6-81—3-6-89, was at the discretion of the editor. The attachment referred to in § 3-6-85 has not been printed in this article. 

Sec. 3-6-81. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-6-82. - Declaration of intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to recognize the unique and disparate traffic-carrying functions of major and minor arterial highways in the county which must serve long-distance traffic movement yet provide access to sites adjacent to the highway which contain individual traffic generators and attractions. (see section 3-6-85 below). 
(b)  It is purpose of this article to serve the public interest by minimizing operational difficulties caused by these incompatible traffic functions, thereby reducing the potential for serious traffic accidents with serious personal injury and accompanying property damage or loss; mitigating environmental degradation; promoting sound economic growth; lengthening the effective life of the county's highway system; and minimizing the future expenditures of tax dollars necessary to preserve the movement of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 2, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-83. - Underlying considerations. 
It is an underlying consideration of this article that: 
(1)  Every owner of property which abuts a non-limited-access road on the county's highway network has a right to reasonable access but may not have the right of a particular means of access. 
(2)  The access rights of an owner or property abutting the county's highway network are subordinate to the public's right and interest in a safe and efficient countywide highway system. 
(3)  In order to protect public health, safety and welfare, vehicular access and connections with highways in the county's transportation network shall be regulated by the county in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  These are various innovative methods that may be employed to reduce traffic congestion on highways fronting developable property. Examples include service drives, continuous right-turn lanes, access from collection streets, commercial parks, and combined parking/access systems. In such cases, any innovative design that is consistent with the spirit and intent of the comprehensive plan traffic circulation element and meets the performance/design standards specified in this article will be considered by the public words department or through the site plan review within the development review committee (DRC) process, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 3, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-84. - Consistency with the comprehensive plan, traffic circulation element. 
Objective 4: Minimize the disruption of traffic from land uses adjacent to major roadways while providing safe movement to and from such uses. 
Policy 4.1 Include within the adopted land use regulations criteria to limit/control the location, number and spacing of access drives along arterial and collector roadways and require adequate left-turn storage lanes and adequate acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
Policy 4.3 Require the use of access roads or shared access drives for new commercial development. 
Policy 4.5: The land development regulations shall include spacing criteria relative to the minimum separation of median openings along collector and arterial roadways. 
Policy 4.6: The county will incorporate within its land development regulations provisions which address the following: 
a.  Frontage road requirements: 
b.  Intersection/interchange locational restrictions for land uses which are high trip generators; 
c.  Building setback requirements; 
d.  Distance requirements for access cuts near intersections and interchanges; 
e.  Design standards (i.e., acceleration and deceleration lanes, turning radii, geometrics, signalization, etc.); 
f.  Intersection spacing standards; 
g.  Minimum maintenance responsibility requirements; 
h.  Anti-obstruction standards (sight distances); 
i.  Incentives to mitigate poor traffic access/hazardous situations; 
j.  Standards to eliminate traffic conflicts with bicyclists and pedestrians. 
Policy 5.1: Ensure that access is limited for adjoining properties within an interchange area as provided for by F.D.O.T. requirements, through the site plan review by the development review committee. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 4, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-85. - Highway access standards. 
The following standards and requirements shall be utilized for construction of entrances and exits to arterials and collectors: 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  Access road: A road or drive generally constructed parallel and adjacent to an arterial highway to provide access for properties to the highway system. 
b.  Arterial (major and minor): A highway or road which is so designated by the comprehensive plan. 
c.  Collector: A highway or road which is so designated by the comprehensive plan. 
d.  Driveway: An entrance or exit onto any street or highway for vehicular traffic. 
e.  Local: A street not designated as an arterial or collector by the comprehensive plan. 
f.  Public works department: The county public works department. 
(2)  Standards for driveways on arterials and collectors: 
a.  Driveway width: The minimum width of a commercial or industrial drive shall be twenty-four (24) feet. The minimum width of a residential drive shall be ten (10) feet. The maximum width of a drive shall be forty (40) feet. The width of a drive shall be measured along the line parallel to the center line of the street. Wider driveways may be approved by the public works department where the drive is to be constructed with medians, in accordance with Ordinance 85-43, as may be amended. Deceleration, acceleration, multiple turn lanes, or additional turn radius to minimize interference with through traffic shall be installed where projected traffic use or volume indicates the need, according to ASHTO recommendations. Standards for local street driveways shall be as provided in section 3-6-21, as may be amended. Design and geometrics shall meet the standards of the public works department for projected traffic; and material requirements shall meet the standards of section 3-6-21, as may be amended. 
b.  Driveway edge turning radius: The minimum radius shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  Drive alignment: The intersection angle of the center line of the driveway and the street shall be between seventy (70) and ninety (90) degrees. 
d.  Sidewalk ramp: Where a curb is extended past an existing sidewalk, a sidewalk ramp meeting standards for handicapped facilities shall be installed. 
e.  Number of access points: 
1.  Access for all uses (except residential units) located on arterial and collector highways shall comply with the following: The maximum number of driveways allowed from one (1) site along each street frontage shall be two (2). The minimum spacing between new driveways and intersections or between driveways and driveways shall be three hundred thirty (330) feet along arterial and collector highways listed in Attachment A to this article. The spacing between an existing driveway and a new driveway along said highways may be less than three hundred thirty (330) feet where the DRC approves the location with conditions it requires to satisfy the intent of this article. A property site located at street corners may have one (1) access point for the first two hundred (200) feet of frontage along each street frontage, and may have two (2) access points along each frontage where the frontage exceeds two hundred (200) feet. New driveways shall include acceleration and deceleration lanes or tapers as recommended by F.D.O.T. standards. Where an overlap exists between acceleration and deceleration tapers and/or lanes, or where the overlap occurs at a street intersection, the pavement shall be widened to a full lane width where the overlap occurs along driveways serving the property. These requirements do not apply to residential units. 
2.  If any property by reason of its location or size cannot be physically developed in accordance with the standards in this article, one (1) driveway along each street frontage shall be permitted at a location which most closely complies with the standards in this article, and no variance will be necessary. Under no circumstances shall access be denied to any property. 
3.  Where existing lot width or environmental concerns make the required spacing between driveways and intersections impossible, a minimum spacing of at least fifty (50) feet and twenty-five (25) feet from property lines shall be approved. Lesser spacing between driveways may be approved by the public works department due to insufficient lot widths or environmental concerns, but in no cases shall this spacing be less than twenty (20) feet. This subsection shall not apply to access roads. Under no circumstances shall access be denied to any property. 
4.  A driveway permit shall be considered for approval of work in the right-of-way, in accordance with section 3-6-21, as may be amended. In addition, any permit issued shall also be consistent with a site plan that was approved by the DRC, where DRC approval was required. The location and design of all items related to traffic movement onto and off of private property located along arterial and collector highways in Attachment A shall be subject to review and approval by the public works department (and the DRC, if DRC approval is also required by the land development regulations). 
5.  There is hereby established an appeals board for the standards in this article. The board of zoning appeals shall serve and perform the duties of such appeals board under the provisions set forth in the land development regulations. 
f.  Joint-use driveways: Provisions for future interconnections to adjoining undeveloped property, and interconnections with adjacent lots, driveways or access roads shall be encouraged whenever possible. Land subdivided after the adoption of this article [May 31, 1989] must comply with this article and shall provide internal circulation systems which provide access to individual lots. Lots created after the adoption of this article shall utilize internal circulation systems for access between lots and shall be permitted direct access to arterials or collectors listed in Attachment A at the minimum spacing listed above. Drives constructed inside the traffic storage lane of an abutting street shall be restricted to right turn-in/right turn-out only, unless otherwise approved by the DRC. 
g.  Curb cut alignment: Whenever possible, existing and proposed commercial and industrial curb cuts shall be in alignment across the street, at median cuts, and at street intersections. When zero offset distance is impossible, drives shall be located to minimize offset distance; and such offset alignments require the approval of the public works department. Median cuts on divided streets shall be a minimum distance of six hundred sixty (660) feet apart, with appropriate storage and deceleration lanes, and taper to handle the projected traffic volume. 
h.  Sight distance: A drive to be located along a property frontage that has less sight distance available than the minimum sight distance required for making all turning movements safely (in accordance with FDOT, Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance of Streets and Highways (latest revision)) shall be located to provide the maximum sight distance available for right turns for ingress and egress and shall be restricted in use to right turns only. 
i.  Redevelopment of abutting and existing property: Any property being redeveloped or altered, such that it requires alterations to the pavement or parking facilities, shall be reviewed by the public works department for projected traffic generation to determine if it should comply with provisions of this article. Any existing drives not in use after redevelopment shall have the unused apron removed, and any drop curb section along the street at an abandoned driveway shall be replaced with a new curb (and sidewalk if previously existing) as approved by the public works department. 
j.  Utility adjustments: If a drive requires a change in any item owned by any utility, the owner shall be responsible for the expense of the adjustment as required by the public works department and the affected utility. 
k.  Location of access drives: The proposed location for an access drive shall make a due provision for: 
1.  Smooth flow of through traffic; 
2.  Minimal conflicting movements; 
3.  Vehicular and pedestrian safety; 
4.  Adequate visibility and sight distance; 
5.  Noise, glare, economic or odor effects of the proposed access drive, loading areas, and parking areas on adjoining properties or neighborhoods. 
l.  Approval: The public works department shall approve or disapprove locations and geometric design for proposed access drives in accordance with this article. If the decision concerning the proposed driveway is negative, the county engineer or his designee shall state the reasons in writing. Because of the concern for public safety and the public necessity to efficiently move traffic on the public highways in the county, the issuance of a permit for a drive shall not obligate the county to allow or provide for all possible turning movements to or from a specific drive. If, at any time in the future, traffic flow conditions in the opinion of the public works department or the board of county commissioners become congested or a hazard due to turning movements to and/or from a driveway, the left-turn movements may be prohibited by the installation of signs and/or a street median barrier curb. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 5, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-86. - Controlled access facilities: arterial and collector roads. 
(a)  In accordance with the transportation element of the comprehensive plan, as amended, all arterial and collector roads within the unincorporated area of the county, identified in said comprehensive plan, shall constitute controlled access facilities. 
(b)  Access to all controlled access facilities shall be permitted by the public works department or its successor in accordance with the policies, rules and regulations as established by the board of county commissioners. The board of county commissioners may adopt, by resolution, an access plan for any controlled access facility. 
(c)  On sites of at least three hundred (300) feet in depth, all commercial development, new subdivisions, or new plats abutting a controlled access facility shall provide a common access road within the development, new subdivision, or new plat. Such access road shall be permitted in accordance with applicable policies, rules, and regulations, as amended. 
(d)  Owners or occupants of property adjacent to other property which has a driveway access to a controlled access facility may share such driveway, provided that permission is granted by the owner of the property on which the driveway is situated and any other affected property owners, and all connecting common access roads are permitted by the Public Works Department or its successors in accordance with applicable rules and regulations, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 6, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 99-003, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 3-6-87. - Performance/design standards for access roads. 
(a)  A developer may use the access road easement, whether dedicated or not, for signage, density, lot coverage and landscaping purposes, so long as traffic sight distance is not adversely impaired, in accordance with section 3-6-6, as it may be amended. 
(b)  Where a common access road is required along a property line in accordance with the terms of this article, the common access road shall have a minimum right-of-way of fifty (50) feet, and may be dedicated to the county at the option of the developer. The mere dedication and/or construction of an access road shall not be a subdivision and shall not require any plat. The acceptance of the dedication of access roads constructed to county specifications will not be unreasonably refused. 
(c)  An access road shall not be required unless the site has a minimum depth of three hundred (300) feet at the time this article is adopted [May 31, 1989]. Access roads may be dedicated to the county at the option of the developer. Unless exempted or otherwise deferred under the terms of this article, access roads shall be constructed at the time of commercial development or subdivision of each parcel along said roads. 
(d)  Under the terms of this article, a developer may utilize a "reverse access road" whereby the back of the lots or parcels may front on the arterial highway. 
(e)  Where, by virtue of adjacent access roads having not yet been built to an access point on arterial highways requiring an access road, the applicant may defer building his portion of the access road provided the applicant agrees in writing and in a recordable form to construct said access road at the time the adjoining property is developed, agrees to dedicate the access road easement, and the applicant records the above agreement in the official records of the county. 
(f)  The center line of an access road shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the arterial right-of-way line (or future right-of-way line as established by a right-of-way reservation map, or as established by the county to implement capital improvement program improvements to the arterial). The access road may be designed with curves in order to accommodate a developer's site plan, provided that the curves have a minimum engineering design speed of thirty (30) miles per hour. The access road center line setback at each property line shall match the centerline setback of an existing access road or road on an adjoining property. If the adjoining property has no access road already constructed, then the access road center line shall be set back the appropriate twenty-five (25) feet unless the written consent of the adjoining property owner is obtained by the applicant. 
(g)  The common access road pavement shall be constructed according to the standards of the public works department and shall, when constructed, be designed to directly extend or connect to an existing or future access road or roadway or to adjacent parcels of land. Access roads shall be constructed so they do not adversely affect arterial highway drainage. 
(h)  Access points from the major arterial highway to the access road shall be located at median cuts wherever possible. Spacing of access points to the major arterial highway from the access road shall be a minimum of three hundred thirty (330) feet, and in accordance with this article. 
(i)  The access road requirements of this article shall not apply to existing phased commercial developments with county-approved site plans, nor shall they apply where the board of county commissioners finds that an access road constructed on a particular site by a developer pursuant to this article would not become functional because existing surrounding development has occurred on adjoining properties on each side of the site without an access road. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 7, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-88. - Building setbacks from access roads and buffer zones. 
All buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the pavement edge of the common access road where the common access road is required. If the common access road is designed as a "reverse access road" on the site or parcel to be developed, setbacks will meet requirements for the zoning classification governing the parcel, and the center line of each access road shall be designed to match the center line of any future or existing access road or road abutting the property. 
The area between the arterial highway right-of-way line and the immediately adjacent common access road pavement shall be a grassed buffer zone. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 8, 5-31-89) 
Sec. 3-6-89. - Cost of maintenance. 
The county shall be responsible for the cost of maintenance of paved surfaces and appurtenant drainage facilities where the access road is constructed according to county standards and is dedicated to and accepted by the county. 
(Ord. No. 89-36, § 9, 5-31-89) 
Chapter 3-8 - WATER AND SEWERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; housing, Ch. 1-8; solid waste, Ch. 1-12; fire protection, Ch. 2-2; health, Ch. 2-3; boats, docks and waterways, Ch. 3-1; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; mobile homes, Ch. 3-4; roads and bridges, Ch. 3-6; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7; fire districts, Ch. 4-3; sanitation districts, Ch. 4-4; sewer and water districts, Ch. 4-5; streets, drainage and lighting district, Ch. 4-6; waterway and canal districts, Ch. 4-7; industrial performance standards, § 3-9-81; well field protection, § 3-9-99. 
State Law reference— Power of county to provide and regulate sewage collection and disposal and water supply, F.S. § 125.01(1)(k); water and sewer systems, F.S. Chs. 153, 367; water resources, F.S. Ch. 373; pollutant discharge prevention and removal, F.S. Ch. 376. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 1, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed Art. I, §§ 3-8-1, 3-8-3, 3-8-4, which pertained to water and sewers in general and derived from Ord. No. 77-15, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 1977; and Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, adopted May 17, 1994. 

Secs. 3-8-1—3-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER UTILITIES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 3-8-11—3-8-73, pertained to standards for water and sewer utilities and derived from Ord. No. 86-25, §§ 1—64, adopted June 17, 1986. 

DIVISION 1. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 2, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed Div. 1, §§ 3-8-11—3-8-15, 3-8-17—3-8-24, which pertained to standards for water and wastewater utilities generally and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 

Secs. 3-8-11—3-8-24. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 2, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed Div. 2, §§ 3-8-25, 3-8-29, which pertained to administration and enforcement and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 

Secs. 3-8-25—3-8-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 2, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed Div. 3, §§ 3-8-30—3-8-40, which pertained to certificate and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-058, § 1, adopted July 22, 2008; and Ord. No. 2011-031, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2011. 

Secs. 3-8-30—3-8-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MANDATORY CONNECTION TO AVAILABLE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 3, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, amended Div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 4, §§ 3-8-41, 3-8-42, pertained to connections and derived from Ord. No. 2015-050, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 10, 2015. 

Sec. 3-8-41. - Connection to available sewer system required. 
(a)  All developed property must connect the plumbing system for any structure on the property to an available public or private sewer system within three hundred sixty-five (365) days after written notification by the public or private sewer system that the system is available for connection. 
(b)  Available, for purposes of this section, means that the public or private sewer system is capable of being connected to the plumbing of a structure and has adequate permitted capacity to accept the sewage generated by the structure, and: 
(1)  For developed residential property, or any non-residential structure that has an estimated sewage flow of one thousand (1,000) gallons per day or less, a public or private utility's sewer collection line exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property line of the lot; or 
(2)  For a non-residential structure with an estimated sewage flow of more than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day, a public or private sewer line, force main, or lift station exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property line of the lot containing the non-residential structure, or is within fifty (50) feet of the property line of the lot, as measured and accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements; or 
(3)  For proposed residential subdivisions with more than fifty (50) lots, for proposed commercial subdivisions with more than five (5) lots, or for areas zoned or used for an industrial or manufacturing purpose, a public or private sewer system exists within one-fourth (¼) mile of the development as measured and accessed via existing easements or rights-of-way. 
(4)  For repairs or modifications within areas zoned or used for an industrial or manufacturing purpose or its equivalent, a sewer system exists within five hundred (500) feet of an establishment's or residence's sewer stub-out as measured and accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements. 
(c)  For property located in an area that is served by Charlotte County Utilities, sewer charges, as contained in the adopted rate resolution, shall be in effect upon connection, or beginning three hundred sixty-five (365) days from notification of the availability of sewer service, whichever is less. Failure to pay such charges will result in initiation of Charlotte County Utilities' delinquency process. 
(d)  All charges, including late charges and interest, for sewer services rendered to any real property located in an area served by Charlotte County Utilities and which remain unpaid when due, shall become a lien against and upon the real property and such lien shall be superior and paramount to the interest on such parcel or property of any owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee or other person except the lien of county taxes and shall be on parity with the lien of any such county taxes. Nothing provided herein with respect to the county's lien authority shall affect or preclude any other remedy authorized by law or ordinance that the county may have to collect delinquent charges or fees. 
(e)  Any person failing to connect their property to an available public or private sewer system within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of written notification of availability shall be guilty of an ordinance violation for each day in excess of three hundred sixty-five (365) days that the property is not connected to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 3, 9-25-18) 
Sec. 3-8-42. - Connection to available private potable water distribution system. 
(a)  All residential and non-residential structures must connect the plumbing system for that structure to an available private potable water distribution system within one hundred eighty (180) days of notification that the private potable water distribution system is available. 
(b)  Available, for purposes of this section, means that the potable water distribution system is capable of being connected to the plumbing of a structure and has adequate permitted capacity to supply potable water to the structure, and: 
(1)  For a residential lot or any structure that has an estimated water usage of one thousand (1,000) gallons per day or less, a water line exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property line of the lot or structure; or 
(2)  For a non-residential structure with an estimated water usage of more than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day, a water line exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property or is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of the structure as accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements; or 
(3)  For proposed residential subdivisions with more than fifty (50) lots, for proposed commercial subdivisions with more than five (5) lots or for areas zoned or used for an industrial or manufacturing purpose, a potable water distribution line exists within one-fourth (¼) mile of the development as measured and accessed via existing easements or rights-of-way. 
(c)  For purposes of chapter 3-8 of this Code, the term "private potable water distribution system" means an entity that owns and operates a potable water system that is properly permitted by all applicable federal, state, and local agencies; is in regulatory compliance; and provides potable water to the public, for human consumption, through pipes or other constructed conveyances and has at least fifteen (15) service connections or regularly serves at least twenty-five (25) individuals daily at least sixty (60) days out of the year, and is either (1) an investor-owned potable water utility company or (2) a non-profit corporation, association or cooperative that provides potable water service to its members. 
(d)  Owners previously approved for an exception to the mandatory connection requirement for an existing well or cistern shall, at their own expense, have the water from the well and/or cistern tested annually for coliform bacteria and nitrates through the Charlotte County Health Department. Testing protocol shall be as contained in Chapter 64E-8 of the Florida Administrative Code. The test results must be provided to the county by the Charlotte County Health Department annually. If the results of the test indicate that the water contains coliform bacteria or that the levels of nitrates exceed ten (10) milligrams per liter, the owner shall disinfect the well or cistern and have the water retested by the Charlotte County Health Department within thirty (30) days of the date of the failed test. If the presence of coliform bacteria or high nitrate levels still is not remedied by the second test, the owner shall be required to connect the structure to an available private potable water distribution system within sixty (60) days. 
(e)  The exception from the mandatory connection requirement previously authorized expires on January 1, 2021. All property previously approved for an exception from the mandatory connection requirement shall notify prospective purchasers of the property that the exception will expire on January 1, 2021, and the property will be required to comply with the mandatory connection requirement in section 3-8-42(a) on that date. 
(f)  Except as provided in section 3-8-42(b) above, any person failing to connect their property to an available private potable water system within the applicable time period for mandatory connection shall be guilty of an ordinance violation for each day in excess of the applicable time period that the property is not connected to the potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 3, 9-25-18) 
Sec. 3-8-43. - County-owned sewer system availability. 
(a)  Availability, for purposes of this section 3-8-43, means the county-owned sewer system has adequate permitted capacity to provide sewer service and a sewer line exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property, or is within one hundred (100) feet of the property as accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements. 
(b)  Where a county-owned sewer line is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property, the property owner is responsible for all costs necessary to connect the property to the county-owned sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 3, 9-25-18) 
Secs. 3-8-44. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - UTILITY EXTENSION STANDARDS 

Sec. 3-8-45. - Purpose and applicability. 
The purpose of this article is to establish criteria and requirements for the connection to, and extension of, potable water distribution, wastewater collection facilities, and reclaimed water facilities for previously unserved areas of Charlotte County. The board of county commissioners has adopted utility master plans to provide for the orderly expansion of its utility system to those areas where density of development and environmental factors indicate that such expansion is economically feasible and in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. County reserves the right to determine the feasibility of extending utility infrastructure based on relevant factors. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrued guaranteed revenue fee (AGRF): The fee that is collected by county and used to pay the costs of reserving, operating, and maintaining the unused water and wastewater plant and transmission capacity in county's utility system that is being held for future utility customers. 
Administrative fee: The fee charged to prepare the utility agreement. 
Bill of sale: A legal document that transfers ownership of an asset from one (1) party to another. 
Certificate of contributory assets: A document that describes all utility system components to be conveyed to county. 
Collection fee: The fee charged for new connections to recover the developer's share of the acquisition, installation, and maintenance costs of the wastewater collection system. 
Developer: Any person, corporation, or other legally recognized entity engaged in the business of making utility improvements to serve real property located within the utility service area of Charlotte County as either the owner or the legally authorized agent of the owner of such real property. 
Distribution fee: The fee charged to new connections to recover the Developer's share of the acquisition, installation and maintenance costs of the potable water and/or reclaimed water distribution systems. 
Equivalent residential connection (ERC): The unit of measure of potable water, and wastewater system capacity required to provide service to an average single family residential customer. One potable water ERC is equal to two hundred twenty-five (225) gallons per day and one (1) wastewater ERC is equal to one hundred ninety (190) gallons per day. One (1) ERC is serviced by a meter size of ¾ inch or less. 
Estimate of probable costs: An estimate of the probable costs of construction of the proposed utility facilities prepared by a Florida-licensed professional engineer regularly engaged in the field of potable water, wastewater, and reclaimed water system design, and submitted by, or on behalf of, developer. 
Fee credit: A monetary credit for developer contributed facilities that can be used to offset distribution or collection fees. 
Inspection fee: The fee charged by county to inspect and monitor the utility work being performed by developer. Inspections include physical inspections of the utility facilities, ongoing monitoring of the progress of the project through completion, review of as-builts/record drawings, review of electronic submittal(s) and data transfer to GIS, and final project closeout. 
Multi-family residential property: Property that contains three (3) or more attached dwelling units, regardless of whether the units are under common or individual ownership. 
Municipal service benefit unit (MSBU): The statutorily authorized mechanism by which county can fund a service or capital project through the impositions of a service charge or a special assessment against the property that receives a special benefit from the service or capital project. 
Off-site utility facilities: Utility facilities such as potable water mains, wastewater collection mains, wastewater force mains, pumping stations, lift stations, and/or reclaimed water mains usually located outside the perimeter boundary of the developer's property and are intended to connect the on-site utility facilities with the county's existing utility system. The geographic location of such facilities shall not change the character of the off-site components of the utility system. 
On-site utility facilities: Utility facilities such as potable water mains, wastewater collection mains, wastewater force mains, pumping stations, lift stations, and/or reclaimed water mains located in rights-of-way or in permanent public utility easements, normally located within the perimeter boundary of the developer's property exclusive of individual service lines located on the customer's side of the potable water meter or sewer service lateral clean out. 
Plan review fee: The fee charged by county to review developer's engineering plans or specifications, including providing the developer's engineer with information regarding utility facility location and criteria. 
Plant capacity: The amount of potable water that can be produced, or the amount of wastewater that can be treated, expressed in terms of average annual gallons per day. 
Potable water: Water that is satisfactory for human consumption, dermal contact, culinary purposes, or dishwashing as approved by the State of Florida Department of Health. 
Reclaimed water: Wastewater effluent that has received at least secondary treatment and basic disinfection and is made available through a reclaimed water system, which is part of county's wastewater utility system used to dispose of treated effluent. 
Reserved capacity: The amount of potable water, wastewater treatment, and reclaimed water, expressed in terms of equivalent residential connections (ERCs), that county has agreed to provide for specified uses to the developer, provided the applicable fees have been paid. 
TAP (transmission, AGRF, and plant) fee: The fee representing the proportionate share of the capital costs of the utility system capacity allocated to a new or modified connection. TAP fees include three (3) components: plant capacity, transmission capacity, and accrued guaranteed revenue fee (AGRF). 
Transmission capacity: The amount of potable and reclaimed water that can be transported by county's potable water or reclaimed water transmission facilities to an individual customer or the amount of wastewater that can be transported from an individual customer by the county's wastewater transmission facilities to county's wastewater treatment plant(s). 
Utility agreement: The agreement between county and developer that contains the obligations of the parties with respect to the installation by developer of either on-site or off-site utility facilities. 
Utility system: Any plant, facility or property, and additions, extensions and improvements thereto at any future time constructed or acquired as part thereof, useful or necessary or having the present capacity for future use in connection with the development of sources, treatment or purification and distribution of potable or reclaimed water for domestic or industrial use or the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater from domestic or industrial users and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, shall include wells, reservoirs, water treatment facilities, storage tanks, pumping stations, transmission mains, distribution mains, potable water lines, hydrants, supply pipes, valves, laterals, meters, meter boxes, service connections, lift stations, vacuum stations, wastewater collection mains, pipes and lines, manholes, wastewater treatment facilities, holding tanks, reclaimed water lines, and ponds for the purpose of obtaining, treating and carrying water to and collecting, treating and disposing of wastewater from the premises connected with such system, and shall include all real and personal property and any interest therein, rights and easements of any nature whatsoever relating to any such system and necessary or convenient for the operation thereof. 
Waiver of lien: A notarized statement from the contractor who performed the utility work that all subcontractors and suppliers have been paid in full. 
Wastewater: The combination of the liquid and water-carried pollutants from a residence, commercial building, industrial plant, or institution, together with any groundwater, surface runoff, or leachate that may be present. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-47. - Utility agreement(s) required. 
(a)  Utility agreements are required for all developer installed utility facilities. 
(b)  All utility agreements must be executed by the developer before the county will sign off on and forward the permit application to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) for Developer installed Utility Facilities. 
(c)  All utility agreements shall include a stated term. Failure of the developer to complete all requirements of the utility agreement within the stated term, or any mutually agreed to extension thereof, may result in county declaring the utility agreement null and void. 
(d)  Utility agreements are specific to an individual property and are not assignable or transferable to any other parcel of property. Utility agreements run with the land and are binding on developer, its successors and assigns, and any other subsequent owner of the property. 
(e)  Capacity is reserved according to the terms of the utility agreement. Any changes, such as downgrading of meter size, may require modification or amendment of the utility agreement. 
(f)  Developer installed utility facilities are not eligible for rebates or refunds. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-48. - Developer installed off-site potable water, wastewater, and reclaimed water facilities. 
(a)  Where the location, proposed density, or proposed use of developer's property makes service to a proposed development dependent upon the extension or upgrading of off-site potable water, wastewater, and reclaimed water facilities, such facilities shall be designed and constructed to county's current standards and installed by developer at developer's expense. County reserves the right to require oversizing of off-site utility facilities. Costs of oversizing will be reimbursed as provided in the utility agreement. 
(b)  County reserves the right to require oversizing and or additional extension of the off-site utility facilities beyond what is needed for the proposed development. Developer will be reimbursed for the costs of oversizing or extending as provided in section 3-8-52 herein. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-49. - Developer installed on-site utility facilities. 
(a)  Developer's obligations. For new developments that require the installation of on-site utility facilities: 
(1)  Utility facilities shall be designed and constructed by the developer, to the county's current standards at developer's expense. 
(2)  Developer must furnish county with accurate information concerning engineering, proposed occupancy type for all buildings and dwellings, and proposed land use densities. 
(3)  Upon acceptance by the county, developer may convey title of the completed utility facility to county. 
(b)  Distribution and/or collection fee credits. 
(1)  Developer is entitled to distribution and/or collection fee credits equal to the actual construction cost of contributed on-site utility facilities as detailed in the executed utility agreement. 
(2)  Distribution and/or collection fee credits are provided on a dollar for dollar basis only and calculated at the rate(s) in effect when the connections are made based on the cost approved by county. 
(3)  The amount of distribution and/or collection fee credits may not exceed the total amount of distribution and/or collection fees due for the property covered by the utility agreement. 
(4)  Distribution and/or collection fee credits are non-transferable and may only be used to offset the distribution and/or collection fees owed by developer for the property covered by the utility agreement. 
(c)  Partially constructed on-site utility facilities. If developer abandons the development and the on-site utility facilities have been partially constructed and not accepted by county, the developer or successor in interest, prior to completing or revising the configuration of the development, will be required to enter into an amended utility agreement to address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Status of any collection and/or distribution fee credits and previously paid TAP fees, if any, taking into consideration the percentage of completion of the existing on-site utility facilities, the length of time since any development activity, and other relevant factors; and 
(2)  Requirements for testing, repair, reconfiguration, or replacement of installed on-site utility facilities, prior to acceptance by county. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-50. - Performance guarantees. 
(a)  Developer must provide evidence to demonstrate financial responsibility to ensure that the installation of the off-site utility facilities is completed. Financial surety for a subdivision shall be considered evidence of financial responsibility and no further surety is required. 
(b)  Projects with an estimate of probable costs of construction for off-site utility facilities greater than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), require a construction performance bond or letter of credit in favor of county. The amount of the performance bond or letter of credit shall be one hundred ten (110) percent of the developer's estimate of probable costs of construction of the off-site utility facilities as approved by county, exclusive of equipment costs. The performance bond or letter of credit shall be provided at the time the utility agreement is executed by county. 
(c)  Performance bonds shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition and subject to the approval of the County Attorney. Performance bonds must provide that: "Unless released by Charlotte County, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the Charlotte County Attorney, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(d)  If developer fails to complete work in accordance with the utility agreement, any damage or loss suffered by county as a result shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, including, but not limited to: the cost of removal, repair, or completion the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-51. - Conveyance of utility easements and rights-of-way. 
Developer is responsible for obtaining and transferring to county any utility easements and rights-of-way required for the proposed utility facilities that will be conveyed to county. The grant or conveyance of utility easements and rights-of-way shall be in a form satisfactory to the county attorney. The conveyances shall be made without cost to county. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-52. - Reimbursement for oversizing or additional extension of utility facilities. 
(a)  County may request that developer oversize or extend utility lines or facilities, beyond what is required for the proposed development, for future anticipated development. 
(b)  County will reimburse developer for the actual, invoiced construction costs, that are attributable to the oversizing or extension. Developer costs for design, project engineering, permitting, and inspection are not eligible for reimbursement. 
(c)  The oversizing or extension reimbursement amount shall be determined by county based on the difference between the construction cost of the utility facilities required to serve the developer's project and the cost to oversize or extend the utility facilities. 
(d)  The maximum reimbursement amount shall be based on difference between the county-approved developer's estimate of probable costs for the utility facilities required for the project and the county-approved developer's estimate of probable costs for the oversized or extended utility facilities. 
(e)  The utility agreement between developer and county shall specify the maximum reimbursement amount attributable to the oversizing or extension. 
(f)  Any utility agreement that includes an oversizing or extension reimbursement to developer for utility facilities that exceeds the purchasing authority limit of the county administrator must be approved by the board of county commissioners. At county's option, the amount of the reimbursement may be deducted from the amount due for TAP fees for the property. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-53. - Design, construction and conveyance of developer-constructed utility facilities. 
(a)  All utility facilities constructed by developer that are intended to be conveyed to county must be designed by a Florida-licensed professional engineer regularly engaged in the field of potable water, wastewater, and reclaimed water system design. 
(b)  All design plans and specifications must conform to county's most current adopted utilities' design compliance standards and the completed design plans must be reviewed and approved by the county utility department prior to the issuance of any permits for construction. 
(c)  All utility facilities must be designed and constructed to extend to the limits of the property to make the facilities available to serve adjacent property. 
(d)  No service laterals or facilities on the utility customer's side of the meter and/or property line/utility easement shall be transferred to county. Such utility facilities shall remain the maintenance responsibility of developer and subsequent owners of the property. 
(e)  The plan review fee and administrative fee are due at the time the utility plans are submitted. Any additional plan review fees incurred due to plan rejection or revision must be paid prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Developer is responsible for obtaining all required permits and must pay permit, inspection, and any other applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-54. - Inspection of utility facilities installed by developers. 
(a)  Right to inspect. During all phases of construction, county shall have the right to inspect all utility facilities installed by developer to ensure that they comply with the county's most current utilities' design compliance standards and the plans and specifications approved by county. County shall have the right to be present during all tests of the component parts of the utility system installed by developer to ensure that the utility system, as constructed, conforms to county standards and the approved plans and specifications. 
(b)  Inspection Fee. Developer shall pay county an inspection fee at the time the utility agreement is executed, provided, however, that if the development is being phased, the utility agreement may provide that a proportionate amount of the inspection fee is due at the beginning of each phase. 
(c)  All constructed utility facilities that do not comply with county requirements must be corrected by developer at developer's expense. 
(d)  Connection to county utilities. Upon completion of construction, developer must connect the utility facilities it constructed to the county's utility system and schedule an inspection by county. Any connection completed and covered by developer without inspection by county may result in developer being required to uncover the connection, at developer's cost, for inspection by county. 
(e)  Indemnification. Developer, its contractors and subcontractors, shall be insured against all losses and injury that may result from the construction and installation of utility facilities by developer. Developer shall indemnify and hold harmless county, its officers and employees, from all liabilities, damages, losses and costs, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, to the extent caused by the negligence, recklessness, or intentional wrongful misconduct of developer, and firms employed or utilized by developer, in installation of the utility facilities. Developer shall include county as a named insured on all applicable insurance policies. 
(f)  Damage caused by developer. Developer shall reimburse county for all damage caused by developer's installation or construction of utility facilities; and reimburse or restore to every owner of property abutting the location of any utility facilities installed by developer for any physical injury or loss caused by the installation or construction activities. Restoration shall include the re-sodding of all swales that have been damaged by the construction and the repair of all physical damage caused to abutting property. 
(g)  Release of lien. After completion of construction and final inspection by county, the developer shall, prior to transfer of all constructed utility facilities to county, provide county with: 
(1)  Release of lien executed by the utility contractor; and 
(2)  Certificate of contributory assets that lists the utility facilities being conveyed to county; and 
(3)  A bill of sale in a form that is acceptable to the county attorney; and 
(4)  Signed releases from all affected adjacent property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-55. - Reservation of capacity in county's utility system. 
(a)  TAP fee. Payment of the TAP fee is required to reserve capacity in county's utility system. 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent of the TAP fee is due and payable within forty-five (45) days of execution of the utility agreement, or prior to the preconstruction meeting with the utility department, whichever occurs first, and will reserve fifty (50) percent of the planned capacity for the project. The balance of the TAP fee is due and payable, at the county's rate in effect when payment is made by developer to reserve the remaining capacity required by the project, prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  At developer's option, developer may pay one hundred (100) percent of the TAP fee to reserve all capacity required for the project at the time the utility agreement is executed. 
(b)  Phased development. 
(1)  If a development is being constructed in phases, capacity is only reserved for those phases where the TAP fee has been paid, and only for the percentage of the TAP fee that has been paid 
(2)  If developer elects to develop and pay TAP fees in phases, the TAP fee for each phase must be paid in full prior to the commencement of utility facility construction for the next phase. 
(3)  A TAP fee deferred for future phases shall be paid at the rate in effect at the time of payment. 
(4)  Separate utility construction permits are required for each phase and TAP fees are calculated based on the ERCs served for each phase. 
(c)  Reserved capacity utilized within five (5) years of the date of the utility agreement will be at the same rate and upon the same terms as provided in the executed utility agreement. 
(d)  Reserved capacity utilized more than five (5) years, but less than ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement will require the payment of an additional TAP fees (based on the difference between the amount of the TAP fee previously paid and the current TAP fee rate). 
(e)  Reserved capacity not utilized within ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement. All reserved capacity not utilized within ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement will be recaptured by county and payment of current TAP fees will be required to reserve capacity and connect to the county's system. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-56. - Recapture of reserved capacity. 
The county will recapture any unused reserved water, sewer, and reclaimed water capacity in the following instances: 
(1)  Failure of the developer, or its successor, to comply with the requirements of the executed utility agreement; or 
(2)  Expiration of the stated term of the utility agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-57. - Fees required to connect to county's utility system. 
(a)  All new connections to county's utility system are required to pay all applicable fees contained in county's current utility rate resolution. 
(b)  TAP fees and collection or distribution fees. 
(1)  Single family residences, master-metered multi-family residential properties, mobile homes, duplexes, commercial properties, and other non-residential properties. TAP fees and collection or distribution fees for single family residences, mobile homes, duplexes, commercial properties, and other non-residential properties are determined based on the meter size and the corresponding number of equivalent residential connections (ERCs) calculated according to the ERC use table below. The minimum TAP fee and collection or distribution fee for any use is one (1) ERC. 

 
(2)  Multi-family residential properties. For individually metered multi-family residential properties, water and wastewater TAP fees and collection or distribution fees are assessed per dwelling unit and are calculated based on one hundred fifty-seven and one-half (157.5) gallons per day (maximum daily flow) per dwelling unit. 
(3)  Multi-family developments. For multi-family developments, all separately metered water uses for the common areas of such developments, including, but not limited to, recreational facilities, clubhouses, meeting rooms, carwash and laundry room facilities, shall be treated the same as non-residential uses. 
(4)  Meter sizing. Developer's determination of meter size must be approved by county to ensure that there will be sufficient water pressure during peak use periods. 
(c)  Collection and distribution fees. 
(1)  A collection and/or a distribution fee is charged for new connections to county-owned collection and/or distribution systems to recover the developer's share of the acquisition, installation, and maintenance costs incurred by the county for the collection and distribution systems. The amounts due for collection and distribution fees are determined based on ERC's associated with applicable meter size. Fifty (50) percent of the collection and distribution fees are due and payable within forty-five (45) days of execution of the utility agreement, or prior to the preconstruction meeting, whichever occurs first, and the balance (fifty (50) percent) is due and payable prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  MSBUs. Collection and/or distribution fees are not charged when the collection and distribution systems are/were installed pursuant to an msbu and all properties have been assessed for the cost of installing the collection and distribution systems, provided that any change in use of the property that results in additional ERCs may require payment of additional collection and/or distribution fees. 
(3)  Collection and/or distribution fees for connections made within five (5) years of the date of the utility agreement will be at the same rate and upon the same terms as provided in the executed utility agreement. 
(4)  Collection and/or distribution fees for connections made more than five (5) years, but less than ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement will require the payment of an additional collection and/or distribution fees (based on the difference between the amount of the collection and/or distribution fees previously paid and the current collection and/or distribution fee rate). 
(5)  Collection and/or distribution fees for connections made more than ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement. All connections made more than ten (10) years from the date of the utility agreement will require payment of the current collection and/or distribution fee. 
(d)  Equipment, meter, and miscellaneous fees. Where applicable, equipment, meter, and miscellaneous fees, as contained in the current utility rate resolution, are due and payable at the time of connection to the county's utility system. In instances where equipment or meter fees have been prepaid by the developer and the county's actual costs for such meters or equipment have increased, additional equipment or meter fees, based on the difference in cost, will be due at the time the equipment or meters are installed. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-58. - Refund of TAP fees. 
(a)  County may refund TAP fees, upon the written request of developer, and provided: 
(1)  TAP Fees were paid for a project which requires a Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) permit and DEP refuses or fails to issue the permit; or 
(2)  A change in developer's project plans results in a lesser amount of TAP fees owed to county; or 
(3)  Developer fails to commence any construction within six (6) months of building permit issuance, final site development plan approval, or final detail plan approval, provided, however, that county shall deduct from the refund an amount equal to twenty (20) percent of the TAP fees for each year, or portion thereof, that has elapsed since execution of the utility agreement. 
(b)  Prior to receiving the refund, developer must provide county with a letter or other documentation from FDEP verifying that the FDEP permit is no longer valid. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-59. - Refund of collection or distribution fees. 
County may refund collection or distribution fees, upon the written request of developer, and provided: 
(a)  The collection or distribution fees were paid for a project which requires a Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) permit and DEP refuses or fails to issue the permit; or 
(b)  A change in developer's project plans results in a lesser amount of collection or distribution fees owed to county, in which case the developer may obtain a partial refund of the excess fees; or 
(c)  Developer fails to commence any construction of the on-site utility facilities within six (6) months after FDEP approval. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-60. - Change of use. 
(a)  When there is a change in use of a property that is already connected to the county utility system, or a property is redeveloped and the number of ERCs for the new use is greater than for the prior use, additional TAP, distribution, and collection fees, at the then current rate, may be required. 
(b)  If the change of use requires an increase in the meter size, additional distribution and collection fees will be due, with a credit given for distribution and collection fees previously paid. 
(c)  There are no refunds of TAP, distribution or collection fees when a meter is downsized. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-61. - County initiated utility line extensions. 
In unincorporated areas of Charlotte County, where public health and welfare may be endangered by the absence of potable water and wastewater service, county may, in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, approve construction of utility line extensions using any funding source that is available for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-8-62. - Municipal service benefit units (MSBUs) for potable water distribution, wastewater collection facilities, and reclaimed water facilities. 
Certain areas of Charlotte County have been previously subdivided into building sites and sold to individuals for investment or later development with commercial or residential structures. County may extend its potable water distribution, wastewater collection facilities, and reclaimed water facilities, into areas of the county where demands for the services have reached reasonable levels in relation to undeveloped sites, or the extensions may be deemed necessary due to public health or environmental factors as identified in the county's utility master plans. In such instances, the county may decide to extend such utility facilities by establishing a municipal service benefit unit (MSBU). In assessing properties to be improved by the extension of potable water distribution, wastewater collection facilities, or reclaimed water facilities, the principles of this extension policy shall prevail in that the assessment imposed shall be based upon the pro rata share of the on-site and off-site utility facilities properly allocable to each buildable property. 
(Ord. No. 2020-014, § 3, 4-14-20) 
Secs. 3-8-63—3-8-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HEARING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 3-8-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-66, which pertained to hearing procedures generally and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 3-8-67. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-67, which pertained to powers and duties and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 3-8-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-68, which pertained to prehearing statement and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 3-8-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-69, which pertained to prehearing conference and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 3-8-70. - Procedure for due process. 
The board shall afford each party in a hearing authorized under the provisions of this article the right to: 
(1)  Receive twenty-one (21) calendar days' notice of the time, place and nature of the hearing, and the matters of fact and law asserted; 
(2)  Present his case or defense by oral and documentary evidence; 
(3)  Submit rebuttal evidence and conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts; 
(4)  Submit for the consideration of the hearing examiner or the board, if it receives the evidence, proposed findings and conclusions and supporting reasons therefor; 
(5)  Submit exceptions to a recommended order, if one is made, and make oral arguments in support of any such exceptions; 
(6)  Make offers of settlement or proposals of adjustment; 
(7)  Be accompanied, represented and advised by counsel, or represent himself; and 
(8)  Be notified within twenty-one (21) calendar days of the denial in whole or in part of any written application, petition or other request. 
(Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 3-8-71. - Evidence. 
In adjudicatory hearings, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in the trial of a civil action in the courts of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 3-8-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-72, which pertained to legislative functions and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Sec. 3-8-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, § 4, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, repealed § 3-8-73, which pertained to rate case expenses and derived from Ord. No. 2007-092, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007. 
Secs. 3-8-74, 3-8-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YEAR-ROUND CONSERVATION AND WATER SHORTAGE MEASURES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 2020, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 3-8-76—3-8-83, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to Year-Round and Shortage/Emergency Water Conservation Measures and derived from Ord. No. 2010-016, § 1, adopted March 23, 2010. 

Sec. 3-8-76. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to protect the water resources of Charlotte County from the harmful effects of wasteful and unnecessary use of water by assisting the state water management districts and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through year-round water conservation and during declared water shortage/emergency conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-77. - Definitions. 
FAC means the Florida Administrative Code. 
Irrigation means the application of water to plants for the purpose of sustaining plant life, promoting plant growth or to facilitate crop production. 
SWFWMD means the Southwest Florida Water Management District, a government entity created under F.S. ch. 373, that regulates water management in portions of Charlotte County. 
SFWMD means the South Florida Water Management District, a government entity created under F.S. ch. 373, that regulates water management in portions of Charlotte County. 
User means any person, individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company, agent, employee or other legal entity, the United States of America, and the state and all political subdivisions, regions, districts, municipalities, and public agencies thereof, which directly or indirectly takes water from the water resource, including, but not limited to, uses from groundwater wells and private or public utility systems, uses under water use permits issued by either SWFWMD or SFWMD, or uses from individual wells or pumps. 
Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial water sources, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, specifically including water withdrawn from wells, but excluding seawater. 
Water shortage means a drought or other situation within all or part of a district, for which the governing board has determined that there is insufficient water to meet the present and anticipated needs of users, or conditions are such that there is a need to require temporary reduction in water use within a particular area to protect to protect the water resource from serious harm. Charlotte County recognizes the declaration of a water shortage by either SWFWMD or SFWMD for properties located within the district's respective jurisdictions. 
Water shortage emergency means a water shortage for which a determination has been made that the powers exercised by either SWFWMD or SFWMD are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety, or welfare; the health of livestock and other animals, fish or aquatic life; or other essential uses. Charlotte County recognizes the declaration of a water shortage emergency by either SWFWMD or SFWMD for properties located within the respective jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-78. - Application. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all users in unincorporated Charlotte County, whether from public or privately-owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This article shall not apply to users using treated reclaimed water or saltwater. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-79. - Year-round or shortage/emergency water conservation measures. 
(a)  Year-round water conservation measures. 
(1)  The year-round water conservation measures set forth by SWFWMD in FAC 40D-22, as amended from time to time, are applicable to all users in unincorporated Charlotte County. 
(2)  Any violation of the year-round water conservation measures promulgated by SWFWMD shall be a violation of this Code. 
(b)  Declarations of water shortage or water shortage emergency. 
(1)  SWFWMD water shortage plan. Upon such declaration of a water shortage or a water shortage emergency by SWFWMD, all water use restrictions for users within the jurisdiction of SWFWMD, and any other measures adopted by the SWFWMD, pursuant to FAC 40D-21, applicable to users within the jurisdiction of SWFWMD, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action. Water shortage or water shortage emergency measures adopted by SWFWMD and enforced by Charlotte County shall supersede mandatory year-round water conservation measures until the more restrictive measure is rescinded by SWFWMD. 
(2)  SFWMD water shortage plan. Upon such declaration of a water shortage or a water shortage emergency by SFWMD, all water use restrictions for users within the jurisdiction of SFWMD, and any other measures adopted by the SFWMD, pursuant to FAC 40E-21, applicable to users within the jurisdiction of SFWMD, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action. Water shortage or water shortage emergency measures adopted by SFWMD and enforced by Charlotte County shall supersede mandatory year-round water conservation measures until the more restrictive measure is rescinded by SFWMD. 
(3)  Any violation of the water use restrictions or other adopted measures pursuant to a water shortage or water shortage emergency declared by either SWFWMD or SFWMD by users within the respective jurisdictions shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-80. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Every law enforcement official having jurisdiction in unincorporated Charlotte County shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this Code by issuance of a citation, summons, or notice to appear in county court, or by filing an action in civil court for injunctive relief. 
(b)  The county administrator may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article of the Code to agencies and departments of county government in the service areas governed by this article, in accordance with this Code, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-81. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  When written warnings are not prohibited by the management district: 
a.  First offense: Written warning 
b.  Second offense: $200.00 fine 
c.  Third and subsequent offense: $300.00 fine 
(2)  When written warnings are prohibited by the management district: 
a.  First offense: $100.00 fine 
b.  Second offense: $200.00 fine 
c.  Third and subsequent offense: $300.00 fine 
(b)  Each day a user is in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Law enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one (1) written warning. The county, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained herein, may take any other appropriate legal action, including, but not limited to, emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Sec. 3-8-82. - Additional measures. 
Any user who purchases and installs an automatic landscape irrigation system shall properly install, maintain, and operate technology that inhibits or interrupts operation of the system during periods of sufficient moisture in accordance with F.S. § 373.62. 
(Ord. No. 2020-045, § 1, 11-24-20) 
Secs. 3-8-83—3-8-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 3-8-91—3-8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-034, § 1, adopted June 26, 2001, repealed former Art. V, Wastewater collection and treatment system, in its entirety, being §§ 3-8-101, 3-8-102, 3-8-121—3-8-123, 3-8-130—3-8-138, 3-8-141—3-8-149, 3-8-151, 3-8-161, 3-8-162, 3-8-171, 3-8-181, as derived from Ord. No. 94-34, adopted Aug. 9, 1994; and Ord. No. 95-045, adopted Sept. 19, 1995. Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2001-034 enacted new provisions which pertained to similar subject matter and are herein set out. Provisions designated as §§ 3-8-178—3-8-181 were redesignated by the editor as §§ 3-8-103—3-8-106 for purposes of classification. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-8-101. - Purpose and policy. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the public health and welfare and to maintain the efficient, economic, and safe operation of Charlotte County Utilities ("CCU") by regulating the quality and quantity of wastes discharged into CCU wastewater facilities; to establish uniform requirements for users of CCU's wastewater facilities; to provide for the county's compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations; and to establish pretreatment program standards modeled after those of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251, et seq.); and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403) and Florida Administrative Code ("F.A.C.") 62-625. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into CCU's wastewater facilities which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the environment or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To protect both the general public and the county wastewater facilities' personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the county wastewater system; 
(5)  To establish a pretreatment program, including permit, reporting and compliance procedures, enforcement, remedies and affirmative defenses; 
(6)  To enable the county to comply with its permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, as required by federal or state laws to which CCU is subject; 
(7)  To ensure that wastewaters and sludges from the system meet all regulatory requirements applicable to either the recycling or reclamation of such wastewaters and sludges; 
(8)  To provide regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the county wastewater facilities through the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users; to authorize monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; and to provide for connecting of private wastewater disposal systems; 
(9)  To provide for fees adequate to cover the entire cost of processing permits and program management; for reviewing and acting upon any permit application; and to cover the cost of surveillance, inspection, sampling, monitoring, any other field services and any other costs of establishing and implementing the program. 
This article shall apply to all users of CCU's wastewater facilities. Compliance with this article does not eliminate the user's responsibility to comply with other applicable federal or state regulations. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of utilities of the county shall administer, implement and establish policies and rules to enforce provisions and standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-102. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq. 
Administrator. The chief administrative officer of the county or his designee. 
Approval authority. Florida Department of Environmental Protection or its successor. 
Ammonia. The concentration of NH 3 , expressed as nitrogen in milligrams per liter (mg/L). 
Assessment. An annual special assessment imposed against property to fund the cost of wastewater collection facilities. 
Authorized representative of industrial user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3, above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the county. 
Available. Sewer is available as defined by section 381.0065, Fla. Stat. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L)). 
Board or BCC. The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Building drain. That part of the piping of a building which collects wastewater inside the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Building sewer. The extension of the inside building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection, sewer connection or service lateral. 
Categorical standards. Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 U.S.C. §1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand ("CBOD"). A measure of oxygen required to oxidize organic matter and oxidizable inorganic compounds in water. 
Charlotte County's wastewater treatment facilities ("CCU"). A publicly owned treatment works ("POTW") or "treatment works," as defined by section 212 of the act (33 U.S.C. §1292) which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The county's wastewater treatment system shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the county facilities from persons outside the county who are, by contract or agreement with the county, users of the county's system. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). A measure of oxygen, equivalent to that portion of the organic matter in a sample, that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant. 
Connection fees. An equitable and proportionate charge made at the time sewer service is newly requested or required to cover the growth related capital cost of construction for master pumping stations, master force mains, treatment and effluent disposal facilities and collection system required to provide service to new connections to the sewer system by new users. 
County. Charlotte County, Florida, a political subdivision of the State of Florida or its agent. 
Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Florida. 
Director of utilities. The person designated by the board of county commissioners to administer the utility department, or his designee. 
Domestic wastewater. The sewage produced from non-commercial or non-industrial activities, and which results from normal human living processes, and which are substantially similar in origin and strength to those typically produced in households. 
Drainfield. A system of open-jointed or perforated piping, approved alternative distribution units, or other treatment facilities designed to distribute effluent for filtration, oxidation and absorption by the soil within the zone of aeration. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Equivalent Residential Connection (ERC). The basis for one (1) wastewater ERC is the production of one hundred ninety (190) gpd of wastewater. 
Excess strength. Wastewater discharges into CCU's facilities that are in excess of normal domestic wastewater. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act. 
Florida Department of Environmental Protection or FDEP. The Florida governmental agency charged with protecting waters of the state. 
FDOH. The Florida Department of Health including its division, the Charlotte County Health Department ("CCHD"). 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Health officer. The county health department director or his designee. 
Holding tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Indirect discharge. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source into CCU's wastewater facilities (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user. User producing wastewater not otherwise defined as domestic wastewater and a source of indirect discharge to wastewater facilities (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial waste survey ("IWS"). A survey, form or questionnaire prepared by CCU to determine which users are subject to pretreatment standard; which users currently discharging into the facilities have a potential to have an adverse effect on the facilities; and to inform CCU of the characteristics of the wastes being discharged into the facilities. 
Infiltration/inflow. Groundwater and surface water which enters into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, and manholes or other openings. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the county wastewater system, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of county's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to industrial users. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
Natural outlet. An outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface ground water. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the promulgation of pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program; 
(i)  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(ii)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater discharged into CCU's facilities which the average concentration of CBOD is not more than two hundred (200) mg/L, the average total suspended solids not more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/L, the average total COD concentration not more than four hundred (400) mg/L, and an average ammonia concentration of thirty-five (35) mg/L. 
On-site sewage treatment and disposal system ("OSTDS"). Also referred to as a sewage treatment and disposal facility, which may contain a standard subsurface, filled, or mound drain field system, an aerobic treatment unit, a graywater system tank, a laundry wastewater system tank, a septic tank, a grease, oil and sand interceptor, a dosing tank, a solids or effluent pump, a waterless, incinerating, or organic waste-composting toilet or a sanitary pit privy that is installed or proposed to be installed beyond a building sewer on land of the owner or on other land to which the owner or owners have a legal right to install a system. 
Package plant. Self-contained sewage treatment facilities built to serve developed areas to which sanitary sewers are not yet available. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits CCU's wastewater facilities into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of county NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, owner, lessee, tenant, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter backwash; sewage; garbage; sewage sludge; munitions; medical wastes; chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock; sand; cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes; and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the county's wastewater facilities. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment other than a national categorical pretreatment standard imposed on a non-domestic wastewater discharge. 
Process water. Any water which, during manufacturing or processing comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works ("POTW"). Charlotte County's Wastewater Treatment Facilities. 
Public notice. Notice published in a daily newspaper of general circulation within Charlotte County. 
Public sewer. A common pipe controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer. A pipe which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank. A subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present, even though unintentional. Equivalent term is wastewater. 
Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Significant industrial user ("SIU"). Any industrial user of the county's wastewater system who: (1) is an industrial user for which categorical standards have been defined by EPA (equals a categorical industrial user); or (2) discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day of processed wastewater; or (3) contributes a processed waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the county's treatment system plants on a per plant basis; or (4) has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the utility director, to adversely affect the county's wastewater facilities. Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the county's wastewater system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the county may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance ("SNC"). An SIU shall be in significant noncompliance when any one (1) or more of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits when sixty-six (66) percent or more of the measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the maximum limit or average limit (if applicable) for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations when thirty-three (33) percent or more of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the maximum limit or average (if applicable) multiplied by the applicable TRC: 
a.  For conventional pollutants, TRC = 1.4 or forty (40) percent over the limit; 
b.  For all other pollutants, TRC = 1.2 or twenty (20) percent over the limit; 
(3)  When the SIU fails to respond within ten (10) days of receipt of a notice of violation (NOV) issued by the director; 
(4)  When the SIU fails to accurately report noncompliance; 
(5)  When the SIU reports false "information"; 
(6)  When the SIU intentionally or negligently violates a permit condition or requirement; 
(7)  When the SIU refuses to permit entry to the director or his designee for inspection, etc., as specified in this article; 
(8)  When any violation occurs that the director reasonably believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass through; or endangered the health of CCU's employees or the general public; 
(9)  When any discharge occurs which causes imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or results in CCU's use of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(10)  When violations of industrial wastewater discharge permit (IWDP) or other required compliance schedules occur such as, but not limited to, failure to start or complete construction, or failure to attain final compliance by the compliance schedule date; 
(11)  When periodic compliance reports, base-line monitoring reports or other required reports are not received by the director within thirty (30) days after due date; or 
(12)  When any violation or group of violations occurs which, in the judgement of the director, may reasonably be expected to have a significant adverse impact on the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program, the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's reclaimed water quality or air emissions generated by the systems or has the potential to endanger CCU's employees. 
Sludge. The solid, or semisolid, residue removed during the treatment of municipal wastewater. 
Slug. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain (building). A building drain used for conveying rainwater, surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, condensate, cooling water or other similar discharge to a building storm sewer or a combined building sewer extending to a point outside the building wall. 
Stormwater sewer. A sewer used to convey rainwater, surface water, condensate, cooling water or other similar liquid wastes. 
Superintendent. The person designated by CCU's director to supervise the operation of the county wastewater facilities and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
Suspended solids. Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as non-filterable residue. 
Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of the act (Clean Water Act) or other acts. 
Trailer. A facility which provides for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and/or sanitation, whether of a residential or commercial (office) nature. 
Transported liquid waste. Certain domestic wastes, including primarily those liquid wastes removed from septic tanks, temporary domestic waste holding tanks, portable toilets, and marine vessels that are not able to discharge their domestic wastewater directly into the county's wastewater treatment facilities through approved discharged points designated by the county, are transported to the facilities by liquid waste transport or similar trucks. Transported liquid waste is subject to the restrictions provided in sections 3-8-122 and 3-8-124. 
Transported waste discharge permit ("TWDP"). A transport waste discharge permit (TWDP) issued by the director is required for any person who proposes to discharge domestic sewage wastes from liquid waste transport trucks to the facilities. 
Uniform extension policy. The rule and regulations of CCU contained in Resolution 94-236 as may be amended from time to time, designed to set forth the service and financial relationship between CCU and property owners, builders or developers seeking to obtain water or sewer service for the benefit of other properties. 
User. Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of the wastewater into the county's wastewater facilities, or any owner of property or tenant/lessee of property required to connect to the county's wastewater system. 
Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and/or institutions, together which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the county's wastewater treatment plants. Equivalent term is sewage. 
Wastewater facilities ("WWF"). Shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. Equivalent term is sewage works. 
Waters of the state. Any surface or groundwater located within the boundaries of the State of Florida or over which the State of Florida exercises jurisdiction. 
Abbreviations: The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings. 
•  CBOD—Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand 
•  CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
•  COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand 
•  EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
•  gpd—Gallons per day 
•  L—Liter 
•  mg Milligrams 
•  mg/L—Milligrams per liter 
•  NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
•  RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
•  SIC—Standard Industrial Classification 
•  TSS—Total Suspended Solids 
•  U.S.C.—United States Code 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-050, § 5, adopted Nov. 10, 2015, repealed § 3-8-103, which pertained to mandatory connection and derived from Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, adopted June 26, 2001. 
Sec. 3-8-104. - On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems ("OSTDS"). 
No OSTDS shall be installed where CCU's wastewater facilities are available. 
It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch basin or other opening, into the county sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any OSTDS, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material, except as provided in section 3-8-180 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-105. - Transported liquid waste regulations and procedures. 
Certain domestic wastes, including primarily those liquid wastes removed from septic tanks, temporary domestic waste holding tanks, portable toilets, and marine vessels that are not able to discharge their domestic wastewater directly into the county's wastewater treatment facilities through approved discharged points designated by the county, are transported to the facilities by liquid waste transport or similar trucks. Transported liquid waste is subject to the restrictions provided in sections 3-8-122 and 3-8-124. This section provides regulations and procedures for the control of the discharge of wastes from commercial liquid waste transport trucks/private septage haulers into the facilities. 
(1)  Administration and permitting. 
a.  A transport waste discharge permit (TWDP) issued by the director is required for any person who proposes to discharge domestic sewage wastes from liquid waste transport trucks to the facilities. The director shall approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all applications for permits in accordance with the policies and regulations established in this section. It shall be unlawful for any person or company to discharge liquid waste transport trucks at the designated facilities without a current TWDP. 
b.  All persons required under the terms of this section to obtain a TWDP shall submit to the county a completed application for a TWDP together with the required fee. Each application shall include the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other business, the name of an authorized representative must be provided as defined in this division. 
2.  The type, license tag number, and description of each vehicle from which waste will be discharged by the applicant. Any new or replacement equipment acquired subsequent to the application shall be reported to the director prior to any discharge from this new equipment into the facilities. 
3.  A statement that the provided information is accurate must be signed by the authorized representative of the wastewater transporter. 
c.  Each permit shall be effective for a one-year period and may include special conditions as deemed necessary by the director. An application for renewal of the permit shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit by each applicant wishing to continue to discharge into the facilities. Failure to submit applications in a timely manner will result in periods when discharge will not be permitted due to lack of authorization. 
d.  The TWDP shall be in addition to any other permits, registrations, or occupational licenses which may be required by the federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Revocation of permit. Any TWDP issued under the provisions of this section is subject to be modified, suspended or revoked in whole or in part during its term for a period of at least one (1) year for cause shown including, but not limited to any one of the following: 
a.  Falsification of any information submitted as part of the application for the TWDP. 
b.  Falsification of any information contained on a required discharge manifest. 
c.  Failure to comply with any requirements or regulations concerning discharges to the facilities as provided by this article (or any amendments thereto). 
d.  Failure to pay required discharge fees, sampling and analytical fees or any assessed surcharges in a timely manner. 
e.  When necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
Withdrawal of permission to discharge shall be in addition to any other penalties for violations of any part of this division. 
(3)  Acceptable wastes. Domestic sewage wastes generated within the county or outside the county as authorized by the director from septic tanks, temporary domestic waste holding tanks, and portable toilets and sewage wastes generated by marine vessels are the only acceptable wastes for discharge to the facilities by liquid waste transport trucks. Wastewaters produced by any type of industrial or manufacturing process and mixtures of industrial and domestic wastewaters from any area are strictly prohibited. 
(4)  Pollutant limitations of acceptable wastes. Acceptable transported liquid wastes as defined in this section are subject to the following pollutant limitations: 
a.  All general discharge prohibitions as itemized in section 3-8-122 of this article; and 
b.  All specific limitations as itemized in section 3-8-124 of this article. 
(5)  Manifest and permit requirements. Prior to discharge of each load of waste into the facilities from a liquid waste transport truck, a complete and signed manifest must be presented to the designated facilities' operator in charge. The completed manifest shall indicate the origin of all wastes contained in the truck to be discharged. The date, customer name, address served, type and amount of waste must be identified on the manifest for each source of waste contained in the truck. The name of the liquid transport company, vehicle license tag number, driver name, date, time and driver's signature must be provided for the manifest to be complete. By signing the manifest, the driver will certify the accuracy of the information provided on that manifest. Discharge will be permitted only when a completed manifest is submitted to the satisfaction of the operator in charge of the facility. 
(6)  Location and time. Acceptable transported liquid wastes shall be discharged at the Eastport Water Reclamation Facility, 3100 Loveland Boulevard, Port Charlotte, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, or any other facility authorized by the director. Discharges may be permitted during other hours and on weekends approved by the director in advance and at an approved time for the discharge. The exact location of the discharge point within the facilities shall be identified by the operator in charge as required. 
(7)  Fees and billing. The fees provided for in this section are separate and distinct from all other fees chargeable by the county. The relevant fees applicable to this section are as follows: 
a.  A permit application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be payable for initial applications for one-year permits, and renewal permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be payable for renewal applications for one-year permits. Each additional truck added to the list during the duration of the permit shall be subject to a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Temporary replacement trucks used for thirty (30) days or less shall not be subject to this fee throughout the duration of the permit. 
b.  Each time a waste load is discharged at CCU, a waste discharge fee based on total gallons discharged as indicated by the receiving station flow meter shall apply. In the event, the receiving station flow meter is inoperable, the fee will be based on the total gallons reported on the waste hauler manifest. 
c.  Waste discharge fee shall be eight cents ($0.08) per gallon for in-county septage waste and ten cents ($0.10) per gallon for out-of-county septage waste; twelve cents ($0.12) per gallon for in-county grease waste and fourteen cents ($0.14) per gallon for out-of-county grease waste per trip. 
d.  A fee shall apply for random sampling and analysis carried out by the county or its agent when any violation is detected as follows: 
1.  The total cost of the sampling and analysis shall be chargeable to the permittee in full. 
2.  The total cost of the demand sampling and analysis for the specific pollutant(s) in violation from all subsequent discharges by the permittee until no further violations are detected in three (3) consecutive samples. 
These fees may be amended by the BCC by resolution or ordinance. 
(8)  Sampling and analysis of wastes. Random sampling of the contents of any liquid waste transport truck proposed for discharge into the facilities may be conducted by the operator in charge prior to discharge. Samples will be analyzed by the county laboratory or other authorized laboratory for the purpose of determining the presence of industrial or other prohibited wastes as specified by division 2 of this article. At the driver's request, samples will be split with the haulage company for comparative analysis at his own expense. At a minimum, random samples will be analyzed for the following pollutants: pH, COD, chloride, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, nickel, silver, zinc, oil and grease, EPA Method 624. Additional analyses may be performed for other pollutants that the director has reason to believe may be present based on an inspection of the sample and the manifest. 
(9)  Enforcement. A notice of violation will be issued to the appropriate permitted waste hauler if random sampling and analysis reveal a violation. Response to this notice must be received by the county within ten (10) working days of receipt by the waste hauler. The waste hauler will be required to identify the origin of the unacceptable waste and to implement appropriate procedures to prevent the reoccurrence of this violation. Increased demand sampling and analysis of discharges will be carried out by the county once a violation has been detected. Escalating enforcement procedures, administrative fines and other penalties will be applied when continuing violations are detected including, but not limited to, termination of service and pursuit of action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the county for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 2007-066, § 1, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 2010-029, § 1, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 3-8-106. - Building sewers and connections. 
A building sewer is a conduit or pipe which conveys wastewater from the plumbing drain system of a building to a public sewer or other place of disposal. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. Authorization may be obtained after approval from the utilities department and payment of all required fees and charges and obtaining written permit from the county community development department. 
The owner or his agent shall make application for a permit on a special form furnished by the county community development department. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the county community development department and the director of utilities. A permit and inspection fee, as specified in this Code, chapter 3-2, shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the county from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
Where sewer service is not initially available, all costs of connection at a subsequent date, associated with permit, construction and extension shall be the responsibility of the permit applicant. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building or buildable lot; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, but the county does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the county community development department to meet all requirements of this article and are approved by the director of utilities. 
If common laterals are permitted by the county, then separate sampling devices must be provided on each individual conduit. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the county. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 as amended from time to time, shall apply. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the floor grade. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, air conditioner drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the county community development department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the county community development department or his representative. 
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all Occupational Safety & Health Act (OSHA) requirements so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner and within a time frame satisfactory to the county. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the county. 
If any building sewer permits entrance of infiltration/or inflow, the county director of utilities shall require one of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the building sewer within sixty (60) days from date of notification; or 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer usage charge that reflects the additional flow of sewage from the owner's property; or 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his building sewer from the county's sewer system within sixty (60) days from date of notification; or 
(4)  Reimburse the county for the actual cost of making the repair to the building sewer and allow access to property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Secs. 3-8-107—3-8-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2.  GENERAL WASTEWATER USE REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 3-8-121. - Industrial waste survey ("IWS"). 
The director of utilities may require any user or potential user to complete and submit an IWS. Once required, the user must submit the completed IWS within twenty (20) days of its issuance. Falsification of information or failure to submit the IWS will result in the imposition of a fine, termination of service, denial of request for service, discharge permit revocation, imposition of any enforcement and remedies of division 7, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-122. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  Generally: No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference of the county's wastewater facilities. These general discharge prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in (b) below apply to all users of the county's wastewater facilities whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specifically: A user may not contribute the following substances to any county wastewater facilities: 
(1)  Dangerous discharges. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the county's wastewater treatment system or to the operation of the county's wastewater treatment system. At no time, shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. In addition, specific prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, fuel oil, solvents, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides, and any other substance which the county, the FDEP or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Any solid, semi-solid or viscous substance. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the county's wastewater treatment system such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes. Specifically prohibited is the heating or chemical dissolving of the contents of grease traps and its discharge to the county system. 
(3)  pH exclusions. Any wastewater having a pH less than six point zero (6.0) or greater than eight point five (8.5), unless the county's wastewater treatment facilities are specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the county's wastewater treatment system. 
(4)  Toxic pollutants. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the county's wastewater treatment system, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act, or other acts, be they national, state or local, with the more stringent limit subject to enforcement. 
(5)  Noxious and malodorous materials. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids, which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Materials affecting effluent and sludge disposal. Any substance which may cause the county's wastewater treatment system effluent or any other product of the county's wastewater treatment system such as residues or sludges, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the county's wastewater treatment system cause the county's wastewater treatment system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 503 of the act, any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Substance causing violation. Any substance which will cause the county's wastewater treatment system to violate its NPDES and/or FDEP permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Color. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  High temperature wastewater. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the county's wastewater treatment system resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the county's wastewater treatment system which exceeds forty (40) degrees centigrade (104°F). 
(10)  Unacceptable flow rates. Slugs—Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the county's wastewater treatment system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Radioactive wastes. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Hazardous wastes. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life, creates a public nuisance or is defined as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
(13)  Non-treatable substances. Waters or wastes containing substances, including non-biodegradable detergents, which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed or are amenable to treatment only to the degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirement of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge or violates any contract, resolution, law, rule, regulation, permit or approval applicable to the industrial, commercial or agricultural use of reclaimed water. 
(14)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director of utilities. 
(15)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(16)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director of utilities or his designee in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(17)  Transported or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director of utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-123. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
Pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which are discharged to the county's wastewater facilities by an existing or new industrial user, in specific industrial subcategories, are established as separate federal regulations. These categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471, are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director of utilities may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director of utilities shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
If the provisions of this article are more stringent than those imposed by federal pretreatment standards, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-124. - Specific pollutant limitations/surcharge and fine. 
TABLE A: CONVENTIONAL PARAMETERS 

 
The surcharge for all high strength wastes above the maximum concentration for normal domestic wastewater for TSS, CBOD and COD shall be established by resolution of the board. Concentrations in excess of the amounts specified in Table A, other than for TSS, CBOD and COD, will be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. 
No discharge to the East Port Water Reclamation Facility shall be permitted in excess of one thousand three hundred forty-nine (1,349) mg/L for CBOD, two thousand six hundred eighty-two (2,682) mg/L for COD, and two thousand two hundred thirty-five (2,235) mg/L for TSS. Concentrations in excess of these limits will be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. 
No discharge to the West Port Wastewater Facility shall be permitted in excess of two thousand four hundred sixty-three (2,463) mg/L for CBOD, one thousand three hundred eighty-four (1,384) mg/L for COD, and two thousand eight (2,008) mg/L for TSS. Concentrations in excess of these limits will be subject to a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. 
TABLE B: TOXIC PARAMETERS 
In order to demonstrate the ability to legally enforce the specific standards outlined in Tables A and B, a technical analysis of the impact of pollutants of concern was performed to determine whether they are sufficiently stringent to protect against pass-through, interference, and sludge contamination. 

 
Industrial waste discharge permit application will be used to develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the WWF's maximum allowable headwork's loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of concern. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-125. - Fines for maximum concentration limits. 
Fines for concentrations in excess of the amounts specified in Table B of section 3-8-124 of this article shall be established by resolution of the board. 
These fines may be amended by the board by resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-126. - Fines for pH. 
The allowable limits for pH is six point zero (6.00) to eight point five (8.50). Fines for pH in excess of the allowable limits shall be established by resolution of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-127. - County's right of revision. 
The county reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or resolution, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the county wastewater system than are provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-128. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 3-8-129. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 3-8-122 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director of utilities, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director or his designee for review and shall be acceptable to the director of utilities before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to county under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-130. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director of utilities may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the county wastewater system and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The director of utilities may require any person discharging into the county wastewater system to install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Fat, oil and grease (F.O.G), oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director of utilities or his designee, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director of utilities and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. See section 3-8-150, Grease trap/oil separator requirements. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 3-8-131. - Wastewater discharges. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the county's wastewater facilities any wastewater, except as authorized by the county by a duly issued permit therefor, or in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-132. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the county's wastewater treatment system shall obtain a county wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the county's wastewater treatment system. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the county's wastewater treatment system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article. The director of utilities shall notify persons who have made incomplete submissions of the permit application and will provide thirty (30) days in which to remedy the deficiency. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-133. - Permit application. 
Users required to obtain a county wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the county, an application in the form prescribed by the county and accompanied by the permit fee established by the rates, fees and charges. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the county's wastewater treatment system. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 3-8-144 of this article. 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW. 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation. 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production. 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge. 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges. 
(8)  Authorization for director or other authorized county employees bearing proper credentials to enter at a reasonable time all properties and premises for purposes of inspection, observation, monitoring, samplings, measurements, testing and inspection and copying of records. 
(9)  Any other information as may be deemed by the county to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the county may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-134. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-135. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions/appeals. 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny on reasonable grounds any application for a discharge permit. 
Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the determination, an applicant desiring to appeal the decision must file a written request for the director to reconsider. Where the director determines that a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. If so, the hearing will be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The director of utilities or his designated representative shall preside over the administrative hearing and shall entertain testimony and evidence. The applicant shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The county shall likewise have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and examine and cross-examine witnesses. The director of utilities shall issue written findings as soon after the hearing as is practicable. The decision of the director of utilities, if adverse to the applicant, may be appealed to the administrator or his or her designee. If an appeal is to be taken, written notice of the appeal shall be delivered to the county administrator no later than ten (10) days after the applicant's receipt of the director of utilities' written findings. The notice must state the justification for requesting the appeal. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of notice of appeal, the county administrator shall determine the appeal and notify the applicant of the decision in writing. If the applicant's appeal process is unsuccessful, the costs to the county, such as attorney's fees and costs, witness fees, and administrative fees, may be charged to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-136. - Permit contents. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the county. 
(a)  Permits must contain the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration as provided in section 3-8-137; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge is non-transferable as provided in section 3-8-138; 
(3)  Effluent limited based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring and sampling requirements as provided in section 3-8-144(2)a through e; 
(5)  Notification requirements as provided in section 3-8-149. 
(6)  Record keeping requirements as provided in section 3-8-154. 
(7)  A statement referring to civil and criminal penalties as provided in sections 3-8-171 and 3-8-172. 
(b)  Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the county, and affording county access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification to the county of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the county to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-137. - Permits duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a one-year period. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the county director of utilities during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-138. - Permit transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific location and operation. Wastewater discharge permits shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the county. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit or modified permit as determined by the county until a new permit is issued. New or changed operations shall require a new permit. New uses or different premises shall require a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-139. - Permit modification. 
The terms and conditions of any permit may be changed by the county during the life of the permit to accommodate changes in local, state and federal regulations or in the event that data upon which the permit was issued has changed. Permit holders shall be notified of change sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of change. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-140. - Wastewater discharge permit public notice and appeals. 
The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the director in writing to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ten (10) days of the publication of the notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of such reconsideration. 
(2)  In its petition, the petitioner must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the petition for reconsideration. 
(4)  If the director fails to act within thirty (30) days, a petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court of Charlotte County for the 20th Judicial Circuit within thirty (30) days from the director's response to the petition or thirty (30) days from the expiration of the thirty (30) days the director had to respond. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-141. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another local government or user located within another local government, contributes wastewater to the facility, the director shall enter into an inter-governmental agreement with the contributing local government. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the director shall request the following information from the contributing local government: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the facilities by the contributing local government; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing local government that are discharging to the facilities; and 
(3)  Such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(c)  An inter-governmental agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing local government to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 3-8-124 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the county's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing local government to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing local government; which of these activities will be conducted by the director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing local government and the director; 
(4)  A requirement for the contributing local government to provide the director with access to all information that the contributing local government obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(5)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing local government's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the facilities; 
(6)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing local government's discharge; 
(7)  A provision ensuring the director's access to the facilities to users located within the contributing local government's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director; and 
(8)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-142. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 3-8-169 of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Prior to revocation of the wastewater discharge permit, the user shall be notified of the proposed revocation and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 3-8-163 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership unless approved by the county. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 5. - RATES, FEES, AND CHARGES 

Sec. 3-8-143. - Rates, fees, and charges. 
The county shall adopt rates, fees, and charges ("fees") applicable to significant industrial users which may include: 
(1)  Fees for cost of administration of the county's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for sampling, monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit application and permit renewals; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal (by the county) of pollutants otherwise subject to national pretreatment standards; 
(7)  Fees (surcharges) as provided in section 3-8-124 of this article; 
(8)  Fees for discharge of transported liquid waste; 
(9)  Fees for discharge of transported liquid waste into facilities; and 
(10)  Other fees as the county may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the county. Fees may be adopted and/or amended by resolution of the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE 

Sec. 3-8-144. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the facilities shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the facilities from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the facilities from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 3-8-150 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 3-8-152 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will complete such additional pretreatment and/or O&M not later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 3-8-145 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 3-8-134 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-145. - Compliance schedule. 
New and existing industrial users shall develop compliance schedules specifying time required to meet all applicable national categorical pretreatment standards. The proposed compliance schedule shall be submitted to the director of utilities for review and approval. This schedule shall indicate the maximum time limit for industrial users to provide additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance in order to meet these pretreatment standards. The completion date of this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment facilities necessary for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment of such schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the county, including: Whether or not it achieved compliance with the increments of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with the increments of progress, the reason for the delay and measures being taken to return to the schedule established. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-146. - Compliance data report. 
(a)  An industrial user subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards and associated pretreatment requirements (including new connectors following commencement of wastewater discharge into the county's wastewater treatment system) shall submit to the director within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with the pretreatment standards and requirements, a report indicating the nature and concentration, as well as the average and peak daily flows, of all pollutants limited by the pretreatment standards and associated pretreatment requirements being discharged to county's wastewater treatment system. 
(b)  This report will indicate whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance procedures or pretreatment will be implemented to bring the user into compliance with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and associated pretreatment requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified by a qualified engineering professional. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-147. - Periodic compliance report. 
(a)  Significant industrial users and industrial users subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards and associated pretreatment requirements shall submit to the director of utilities twice annually, during the months of June and December (unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standards or by the director of utilities), a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent being discharged which are limited by referenced pretreatment standards. This report shall include a record of the average and peak daily flows being discharged during the reporting period. Additionally, this report must contain all self-monitoring results. In the event that any monitoring by the industrial user shows any violation, no matter how minor, the industrial user must resample and resubmit both results to the director within thirty (30) days. At the discretion of the county and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director of utilities may decide to alter the months during which the compliance reports are to be submitted by a particular user. 
(b)  The county may impose mass (quantum) limitations on industrial users to meet the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and/or local discharge limits in cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the compliance data report required by section 3-8-146 shall indicate the quantity of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment standards to be discharged by the industrial user as well as a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other unit of operation), the report must include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. These reports will contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge and will include a record of the flow, nature and concentration, or quantity in pounds where requested by the director of utilities, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards and associated pretreatment requirements. 
The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the referenced pretreatment standards. All analyses will be performed in accordance with the procedures established in section 3-8-151. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-148. - Monitoring and sampling facilities. 
The county shall have the right to construct, operate and maintain monitoring facilities at the industrial user's expense in order to allow inspection of the building, building sewer or internal drainage systems, and sampling and flow measurement of the waste being discharged to the county's wastewater treatment system in order to ensure compliance with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and related pretreatment requirements. Appropriate valving shall be included in design and construction of such facilities to halt discharges prohibited by section 3-8-122. Ample room shall be provided in the area of such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including sampling and measurement equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the county at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-149. - Dangerous discharge prevention and notification requirements. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection shall be submitted to the county utilities department for review and shall be approved by the county director of utilities before issuance of a permit and shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of utilities of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 3-8-149(b) of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
The director may re-evaluate these plans every two (2) years and may require the user to modify the existing plan or submit new plans. 
All existing industrial users shall complete such a plan within one (1) year of the issuance of a permit. No user who commences contribution to the county's wastewater treatment system shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the county's wastewater treatment system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the county and the planned facilities are in place. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this regulation. 
(b)  In the case of an accidental or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to telephone notification to the director of utilities of the incident immediately. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and correction actions. 
(c)  Within five (5) calendar days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit to the director of utilities a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, the amount and type of pollutant released, and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Neither the notification nor the report shall relieve the user of liability for any expenses, losses or damages which may be incurred as a result of damage to the county's wastewater treatment system, or any damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liabilities which may be imposed by this or other applicable laws. 
(d)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place, advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-150. - Fat, oil, and grease trap/oil and sand separator/interceptor requirements. 
(a)  Fat, oil and grease (F.O.G.) interceptors required. Users who operate restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, take-outs, cafeterias, bars, clubs, or hotel, hospital, factory or school kitchens or other establishments that serve or prepare food where F.O.G. may be introduced to the sewer system shall have an F.O.G. interceptor. 
Take-out food establishments or other establishments that prepare food but do not cook in oil or grease and who serve food only in disposable containers may utilize alternative interceptors as approved by the director, provided their discharges will not violate any discharge prohibitions of this article. F.O.G. interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuff establishments when they are deemed necessary by the director. 
(b)  Oil and sand interceptors required. Users who operate automatic and coin operated laundries, car washes, filling stations, commercial garages or similar businesses having any type of washing facilities or grease racks and any other users producing grit, sand, oils or other materials which may have the potential of causing partial or complete obstruction of the building sewer or other areas in the sewer system shall install interceptors approved by the director. 
(c)  Location of interceptors. All interceptors shall be located outside the building in such a manner that personnel from CCU can inspect the interceptors at any time. 
(d)  Size of interceptors. All interceptors shall be sized to ensure that the county's sewer system is protected from excessive F.O.G., sand and oil which may cause clogging or damage and that the user is capable of meeting all discharge requirements. F.O.G. interceptors shall be based on chapter 10 of the Florida Building Code, as amended. 
(e)  Sampling port. A sampling port shall be installed in an approved location to allow sampling by the utility and the user. The sample port shall be located between the interceptor and the discharge point to the sewer system. 
(f)  Access manholes. An access manhole must have a minimum diameter of twenty-four (24) inches and shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to the finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection and cleaning. 
(g)  Plans required. The following must be submitted to CCU for review and approval prior to installation of an interceptor. 
(1)  Site plans showing the location of the interceptor, lines, clean out or manhole and sample port; 
(2)  Details of the interceptor, lines, clean out or manhole and sample port; and 
(3)  Formula and calculation used to determine the interceptor capacity. 
Note: No non-grease-laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease, oil and sand separators. 
(h)  Existing interceptors. All interceptors currently in use or in existence at the time of this article will be considered sized sufficiently provided they meet all discharge requirements as stated in this article. All new interceptors or interceptors to replace or upgrade existing interceptors will be required to meet all criteria stated in this division. 
(i)  Inspections. When upon inspection the interceptor is found to have six (6) inches or more of solids in the bottom of the interceptor (using a sludge judge) or a grease cap of three (3) inches or more, or the establishment exceeds discharge compliance levels, the director can require a grease pump out. Upon completion of an on-site inspection or analytical results of sampling indicate a violation of this article, the director may issue a "notice of violation" to the user or representative to document any discrepancies, noncompliance, special instructions or other guidance identified during the on-site inspection. 
(j)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The user of the premises or business where such interceptor is located shall obtain from CCU a maintenance card which shall be posted in a conspicuous manner showing proof of regular maintenance. Such card shall be obtained annually and shall be presented upon request. All records pertaining to the maintenance of an interceptor shall be retained by the user for a period of not less than three (3) years and available to CCU upon request. 
(2)  Every F.O.G. interceptor shall be cleaned every ninety (90) days or sooner, if needed. An exemption may be granted to the ninety-day minimum requirement if the user can establish that such maintenance schedule is not necessary. 
(k)  Alternative treatments. The use of any free-enzyme, chemical, or other products designed to emulsify, liquefy or further render grease soluble for the purpose of clearing drains or circumventing the design of the interceptor is prohibited. All products claiming biological activity must be approved by the director. Approval for this or any other treatment does not relieve the user of properly maintaining the interceptor as to prevent discharge violations to occur. 
Failure to comply with this section shall subject the user to appropriate enforcement, fines, and procedures as set forth in this article. Additionally, if any person fails to comply with this section and said failure results in damage to the county's system, the county shall be entitled to recover the cost of repair of the system from said person and any fines or penalties assessed against the county as a result of such failure. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-151. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in EPA 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-152. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in paragraph (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-153. - User to notify of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-154. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, sample custody number and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation or any administrative action concerning the user or the county, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-155. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-156. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The director shall have the right to enter the premises of any user at reasonable times without prior notification to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director, upon showing of proper credentials, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, sampling, testing, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at his own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to the manufacturer's recommendation to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-157. - Search warrants. 
If the director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the county designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the court of competent jurisdiction in the county. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-158. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the municipality where the county wastewater system is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of county wastewater system personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-159. - Confidential information. 
(a)  In accordance with F.S. chapter 119, all information and documents submitted to CCU are considered to be public information and, as such, are available to the public for reading or copying. However, in accordance with F.S. section 403.111, any information submitted to CCU in accordance with this article may be claimed as confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be claimed as confidential by the submitter and must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or instruction, or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, CCU may make the information available to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will be treated in accordance with the procedures in F.S. section 403.111. 
(b)  Effluent information and data provided to the county pursuant to this article shall be available to the public without restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-160. - Compliance with more stringent standards. 
(a)  The county reserves the right to establish by amendment to this article by subsequent ordinance or resolution, locally developed limitations or more stringent requirements on discharge to the wastewater disposal system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this article. 
(b)  Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The county shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, section 403.12. 
(c)  No industrial user shall increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the county or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES 
Subdivision A. - Administrative 

Sec. 3-8-161. - Notification of violation. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation in person, by facsimile machine or certified mail. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-162. - Consent orders. 
The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 3-8-164 and 3-8-166 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-163. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-164. - Compliance orders. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-165. - Compliance enforcement and fines. 
(a)  Enforcement procedure. Whenever the director determines or has reasonable cause to believe that a discharge of wastewater has occurred in violation of the provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director shall evaluate the violation as prescribed below: 
(1)  If the director determines the violation does not cause the SIU to be in SNC as defined in section 3-8-102 of this article, he shall issue the SIU a notice of violation stating the nature of the violation and requesting information or requiring corrective action within ten (10) days. In response to this notice: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to respond within ten (10) working days of the date of the notice shall cause the SIU to be in SNC, and the director may issue a notice of SNC as prescribed in subsection (3) below and an administrative fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
b.  If the SIU responds with an acceptable written explanation for the violation or corrects the violation within the prescribed time, the director may cease all further enforcement action. 
c.  If the SIU requests additional time to correct the violation, it shall submit a compliance schedule outlining what steps will be taken to gain compliance and prevent reoccurrence of the violation. The director shall evaluate this request, modify it as deemed necessary and may issue a short term compliance schedule requiring the corrective actions to be made within a specified period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days as prescribed in subsection (2) below. 
d.  If the SIU responds that pretreatment is required to correct the discharge problem, the director may issue a notice of SNC as prescribed in subsection (3) below. 
(2)  Once an SIU has received a short term compliance schedule: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to implement the short term compliance schedule within ten (10) working days of date of the issuance of the schedule may cause the director to declare the SIU to be in SNC, issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (5) below. 
b.  If the SIU complies with the short term compliance schedule within the specified time period, the director may cease further enforcement action. 
c.  If the director determines that compliance has not been achieved after the time specified in the short term compliance schedule, or no response has been received from the SIU, the director may declare the SIU to be in SNC, issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (5) below. 
(3)  If the director determines the violation causes the SIU to be in SNC as defined in section 3-8-102 of this article, he may issue the SIU a notice of SNC stating the nature of the violation and requiring corrective action within a specified time period. The director shall also publish the significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards in a newspaper of general circulation as set out in section 3-8-158 of this article in response to the notice of SNC: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to respond within ten (10) working days of the date of the notice may cause the director to issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (5) below. 
b.  If the SIU requests additional time to correct the violation, it shall submit a compliance schedule outlining what steps will be taken to gain compliance and prevent reoccurrence of the violation. The director shall evaluate this request, modify it as deemed necessary and may issue a first compliance schedule requiring the corrective actions to be made within a specified period of time as prescribed in subsection (4) below. 
(4)  Once an SIU has received a first compliance schedule: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to implement the first compliance schedule within ten (10) working days of receiving the schedule may cause the director to issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (5) below. 
b.  If the SIU complies with the first compliance schedule within the specified time period, the director may cease further enforcement action. 
c.  If the director determines that compliance has not been achieved after the time specified in the first compliance schedule, or no response has been received from the SIU, the director may issue an administrative fine to the SIU in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation per day and issue a final compliance schedule as prescribed in subsection (5) below. 
(5)  Once an SIU has received the administrative fine above and a final compliance schedule: 
a.  Failure of the SIU to implement the final compliance schedule within ten (10) working days of the date of issuance of the schedule may cause the director to revoke the discharge permit, terminate the SIU's sewer service and seek to fine the SIU in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. 
b.  If the SIU complies with the final compliance schedule within the specified time period, the director may cease further enforcement action. 
c.  If the director determines that compliance has not been achieved after the time specified in the final compliance schedule, or no response has been received from the SIU, the director may revoke the discharge permit, terminate the SIU's sewer service and seek to fine the SIU in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-166. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-167. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Additionally, if a user violation causes the facility to not meet its required permit limits and/or a penalty is imposed on the county, the user who has committed the violation may also be required to pay the cost of repairing all damages to the facility, restoring the facility to its original working order, and pay the penalty, if any, imposed on the county. 
(c)  Such fines may be added to the user's next scheduled service charge, and the director shall have such other collection remedies as provided by the credit and collection policy as amended to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the owner's/user's property. 
(d)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where the director determines that a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter. If so, the hearing will be held within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The director of utilities or his designated representative shall preside over the administrative hearing and shall entertain testimony and evidence. The alleged violating user shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to examine and cross-examine witnesses. The county shall likewise have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and examine and cross-examine witnesses. The director of utilities shall issue written findings as soon after the hearing as is practicable. The decision of the director of utilities, if adverse to the alleged violating user, may be appealed to the administrator or his or her designee. If an appeal is to be taken, written notice of the appeal shall be delivered to the county administrator no later than ten (10) days after the violator's receipt of the director of utilities' written findings. The notice must state the justification for requesting the appeal. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of notice of appeal, the county administrator shall determine the appeal and notify the alleged violating user of the decision in writing. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, and the cost of the hearing, such as attorney's fees and costs, and witness fees, to the fine. 
(e)  Issuance of an administrative fine or the holding of a hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
These fines may be amended by the board by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-168. - Emergency suspensions. 
The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the facility, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the facility, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 3-8-169 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 3-8-164 or 3-8-166 of this article. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-169. - Termination of wastewater discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 3-8-142 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to wastewater discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 3-8-129 and 3-8-130 of this article. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 3-8-163 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Subdivision B. - Judicial 

Sec. 3-8-170. - Injunctive relief. 
When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the court of appropriate jurisdiction for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-171. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the county for a maximum civil penalty or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the county. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-172. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors and, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the facilities which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-173. - Water supply severance. 
Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed; and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-174. - Remedies non-exclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user or any other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
DIVISION 8. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 3-8-175. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 3-8-123 or the specific prohibitions of this article in section 3-8-122(b), except for (b)(1), (3) and (18), if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  A local limit does not exist for the pollutants that caused the pass through or interference, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the facilities were regularly in compliance with its permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-176. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c) below are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Sec. 3-8-177. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
(1)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(2)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
(3)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2001-034, § 2, 6-26-2001) 
Secs. 3-8-178—3-8-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, adopted May 22, 2007, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 3-8-191—3-8-226, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-61, §§ 1.01—1.21 and §§ 2.01—2.06, adopted Nov. 8, 1994. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-8-191. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the county to make reclaimed water available for irrigation purposes and other authorized non-potable uses in certain areas of the county where the board of county commissioners determines that the construction of a reclaimed water distribution system is desired or requested by customers, and is practical and economical. The reclaimed water distribution system shall be constructed in phases to provide service to designated areas as determined by the board of county commissioners, pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-2007) 
Sec. 3-8-192. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the definitions contained in this section shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Approved backflow prevention assembly shall mean any effective assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system that has been investigated and approved by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, or the American Water Works Association, using whichever standard is more stringent. 
CCU shall mean Charlotte County Utilities. 
Cross-connection shall mean any physical connection or arrangement which would allow the movement of fluids between the potable water system and any non-potable piping system, such as the reclaimed water system. 
Customer shall mean owner or agent with the legal authority, relative to real property, to make binding determinations. 
Department shall mean Charlotte County Utilities. 
Director of utilities (also referred to as the director) shall mean the individual responsible for the technical and operational activities of Charlotte County Utilities or his/her designee. 
Distribution mains shall mean those conduits used to supply reclaimed water to service lines from trunk mains. 
Facilities shall be defined as the components that form the reclaimed water delivery system, including, but not limited to, piping, valves, pumps, controls, meters, sensors and remote telemetry. 
FDEP shall mean the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Neighborhood shall be defined (as a minimum size) as the residential, multi-family, commercial and industrial customers within a Pump Station Service Area (PSSA). 
Reclaimed water shall mean wastewater that has received advanced secondary treatment in accordance with FDEP regulations, as amended, and is reused after flowing out of a water reclamation facility. 
Reuse shall mean the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with FDEP regulations, as amended, for a beneficial purpose. 
Service line shall mean that conduit for reclaimed water from the distribution main to the property line. 
Transmission mains shall mean those conduits used to supply reclaimed water from the pumping station or water reclamation facility to the distribution mains. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-193. - Availability of service. 
The term "available" means that a functioning reclaimed water distribution main is located within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be serviced or, in the alternative, that it is cost effective for the county to extend a reclaimed water distribution main to within five hundred (500) feet of the subject property. However, regardless of proximity to a distribution main, the county reserves the right to make a final determination of the availability of service to a property based on the practicality, economics and clear and measurable benefits of providing said service, as determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-194. - Procedure for voluntary distribution main extension. 
As reclaimed water transmission mains become available, the county shall conduct neighborhood surveys to determine customer interest in receiving reclaimed water. Based on the results of these surveys, and where extending reclaimed water service is determined to be practical and economical, the county shall: 
(1)  Prioritize areas for extension of distribution mains. 
(2)  Prepare and adopt a resolution designating the new service area for reclaimed water. 
(3)  Authorize the preparation of construction contract documents for extending distribution mains in accordance with county procurement procedures. 
(4)  Award the construction contract in accordance with county procurement procedures. 
(5)  Upon construction completion and engineer's certification of the operation of the system, provide written notification to all customers that service is available. Refer to section 3-8-195 for system connection requirements. 
The county reserves the right to redefine the geographic boundaries of proposed project areas, as necessary to meet the engineering and economic objectives associated with the reclaimed water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-195. - Connection to system. 
Customers in designated service areas may connect to the reclaimed water system when service is available and upon submission of a proper application, including projection of use, and land application calculation plans showing proposed tie-in points, signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer and in compliance with all county requirements. When service is available, all customers that connect to the reclaimed water system will be charged a monthly usage charge. These charges shall be established by resolution, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-196. - Authority to adopt rates, fees and charges. 
The board of county commissioners shall have the authority by resolution, duly adopted after a public hearing, to establish rates, fees and charges for the reclaimed water system and to provide terms and conditions for the payment and collection of same. Pursuant to the authority of Florida Statutes section 403.064, the county shall have the power to allocate the costs of the reclaimed water system in a reasonable manner and to recover all or a portion of such costs in the rates established for such a system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-197. - Discontinuing service by county. 
The county may discontinue reclaimed water service to any customer due to a violation of the terms of this article or county regulations; local, state or federal regulations; nonpayment of bills; tampering with any service; cross-connections with any potable water source; or for any reason that may be detrimental to the system or a risk to public health. The county has the right to cease service until the condition is corrected and all costs due the county are paid. Costs due to the county may include past due bills and penalties, connection charges, and payment for any damage caused to the system, together with any charges established on the basis of the expenses incurred in the disconnection and restoration of service, which shall be non-discriminatory in its application. Should discontinued service be turned on without authorization, the department shall remove the service and make such additional charges as are established by resolution or ordinance, or as are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-198. - Service interruption. 
The county reserves the right to temporarily discontinue service to any portion of, or the entire reclaimed water system as deemed necessary by the director or as required by FDEP regulations, as amended, or for predictable as well as unforeseen shortages and reclaimed water supply issues, or maintenance to the system. 
In addition, the director shall have the authority to establish schedules which restrict the use of the reclaimed water system at certain times in order to control pressure and flow demands within the system and to regulate usage during periods of limited reclaimed water availability. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-199. - Right to refuse service. 
No payment of any costs, submittal of any petition, or any other act to receive reclaimed water service shall guarantee such service. The county shall have the right, at all times, to refuse to extend service on the basis of a use detrimental to the system, a potential risk to public health, inadequate supply of reclaimed water, lack of payment of required fees, or for any other reason which, in the judgment of the director, will cause the extension to be nonbeneficial to the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-200. - Service application requirements. 
(a)  No connection to the county reclaimed water system shall be permitted without a written agreement for reclaimed water service with the county, a completed application for service, and FDEP approval. 
(b)  The application for service shall be on a form provided by the county and shall be filed with the department. 
(c)  The agreement for reclaimed water service shall provide that the customer consents to the entry by the county upon the property described in said application for the purpose of conducting all inspections permitted or required by this article and waives the right to receive further notice from the county of inspections conducted pursuant to this article and indemnifies the county, its agents and employees, from all claims, damages, judgments and expenses (including attorney fees) incurred by the county as a direct result of the use or discharge of reclaimed water by the customer in violation of the terms of this article or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(d)  The county shall inspect each property prior to connection to the reclaimed water system, as described in detail in section 3-8-210 of this article. 
(e)  No connection shall be permitted until the customer has a CCU-approved backflow prevention assembly installed on their potable water system to protect the potable water supply. 
(f)  All connections to the reclaimed water system shall be inspected by the department prior to the use of reclaimed water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-201. - Meter requirements. 
Reclaimed water shall only be supplied through CCU-approved metered connections. The director shall determine the size and type of meter required for each service. All approved meters for the reclaimed water system shall be installed by the user, unless provided otherwise in a written agreement with the county. Nonresidential bulk users, condos, apartments, and other multi-family customers may require master meters if beneficial to the system, as decided by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-202. - Cross-connection control. 
(a)  On all properties where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or private potable water supply shall be protected by a CCU-approved backflow prevention assembly, as specified in the county's most current "Manual for Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Protection." No cross-connection shall be permitted. All assemblies and material installed for cross-connection control must be approved by the director. 
(b)  To determine the presence of any potential hazards to the public potable water system, representatives of the Charlotte County Health Department and/or CCU shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any customer receiving reclaimed and/or potable water service. Upon the execution of an agreement for reclaimed and/or potable water service, the customer shall be deemed to have consented to the entry by the county upon the property described in said agreement for the purpose of conducting all inspections permitted or required by this article and waives the right to receive further notice from the county of inspections conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  In the event a cross-connection is found on a property receiving reclaimed water service, the director shall have the authority to immediately discontinue reclaimed water service to said property and/or sever the cross-connection. In addition, the director shall have the authority to clear the potable water lines of any potential contamination and to test for additional cross-connections on said property. Before resuming service, the customer shall make such corrections as may be required by the director and have the service reinspected in accordance with section 3-8-200. Costs associated with the violation will be applied in accordance with section 3-8-197. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-203. - Construction specifications. 
The following specifications shall apply to irrigation systems, piping and appurtenances to be connected to the reclaimed water system: 
(1)  All connections shall meet the specifications and be in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations: 
a.  No reclaimed water is permitted inside any single-family or duplex dwelling unit, or any dwelling unit where the residents have access to the plumbing system for repairs or modifications. 
b.  As approved by CCU, reclaimed water may be used for air-conditioning cooling systems in commercial or industrial facilities or buildings, in accordance with FDEP regulations as amended. 
c.  No above ground reclaimed water hose bibbs (spigots or hand-operated connections) shall be permitted for residential customers. 
d.  For nonresidential reclaimed water users, below-ground reclaimed water hose bibbs are permitted when they are clearly labeled as non-potable and can only be operated by use of a special tool to be approved by the director and in accordance with FDEP regulations as amended. Reclaimed water valves will be located in an approved, reclaimed water box. 
(2)  Existing residential irrigation systems may connect to reclaimed water systems, provided there are no hose bibbs, no cross-connections and the potable water supply is protected by a CCU-approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  New residential irrigation systems shall comply with all local, state and federal regulations and applicable codes and ordinances. In addition, there shall be no reclaimed water hose bibs and no cross-connections. Additionally, the potable water supply shall be protected by a CCU-approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  Existing nonresidential irrigation systems that may connect to the reclaimed water system shall have no above ground reclaimed water hose bibbs and no cross-connections. The potable water supply shall be protected by a CCU-approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  All connections, residential and nonresidential, require the use of a licensed utility contractor or plumber. 
(6)  New reclaimed water distribution improvements dedicated to the county for maintenance shall meet the following specifications: 
a.  All pipes shall be at least C-900, DR18, Class 150 PVC and shall be purple in color (similar to Pantone 522C) and marked with metallic tape reading "RECLAIMED WATER." 
b.  All improvements shall require a construction permit and shall be constructed by a licensed utility contractor or plumber. 
c.  Three (3) sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the permit application, signed and sealed by a licensed Florida professional engineer. 
d.  Mains shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in diameter or as required by CCU. 
e.  Service lines shall be sized as required by the property served, but shall in no case be less than one (1) inch in diameter. Sizes of service lines required by the applicant are subject to approval by CCU. 
f.  Mains in the public right-of-way shall be located at uniform distance from the curb with locations and separation distances from other utilities per department construction specifications or state requirements. 
g.  Where water mains are to be turned over to the county, the customer shall submit such documents as are normally required for the dedication of public facilities. 
h.  An appropriate number of automatic blow-offs shall be provided, per department specifications. 
(7)  As required by state regulations, advisory signs shall be posted where reclaimed water is utilized in public areas. Advisory signs shall include the following text in both English and Spanish: "Do Not Drink," together with the equivalent standard international symbol. 
(8)  Advisory signs shall be posted adjacent to lakes and ponds used to store reclaimed water that are not located at the wastewater treatment facility, as well as decorative water features that use reclaimed water. In such cases, the advisory signs shall include the following text in both English and Spanish: "Do Not Drink" and "Do Not Swim," together with the equivalent standard international symbols. 
(9)  CCU does not guarantee the supply of reclaimed water; therefore the user is responsible for the establishment of a backup system, if needed. On-site storage ponds or tanks are a recommended means of ensuring an uninterrupted supply. All alternate water sources, such as canals, wells and ponds used as backup sources or to supplement the reclaimed water supply, must comply with local, state and federal regulations, including regulations from FDEP, the South Florida Water Management District, and the Southwest Florida Water Management District. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-204. - Maintenance by customer. 
The property owner and/or customer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all reclaimed water lines and appurtenances on their property not conveyed to the county. The county reserves the right to disconnect the service to any property when the irrigation system or appurtenances are not properly maintained. In addition, should the customer require reclaimed water at different pressures, or different quality, or in any way different from that normally supplied by the county, the customer shall be responsible for the necessary devices for making these adjustments and obtaining approval by the director prior to constructing and/or operating such devices. All signs, markings, etc., which identify an area, pond or piping as reclaimed water shall not be tampered with by the customer. Tampering will result in discontinuance of reclaimed water service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-205. - County maintenance. 
(a)  All facilities that have been accepted by the county shall become the property of the county and will be operated and maintained by the county. No person shall perform any work or be reimbursed for any work on the system unless written authorization from the county is received prior to the work being accomplished. 
(b)  The county shall make every effort to inspect and keep its facilities in good repair but assumes no liability for any damage caused by the system that is beyond the control of normal maintenance or due to situations not previously reported to the department. These situations shall include, but are not limited to, damage due to breaking the pipes, poor quality of water caused by unauthorized or illegal entry of foreign material into the system, faulty operation of fire protection facilities, or other reasons. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-206. - Chemical injections. 
All users of direct service connections are prohibited from adding chemicals to the irrigation systems when connected to the county reclaimed water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-207. - Common service lines. 
The director has the authority to approve one (1) service line to connect two (2) or more customers when sufficient capacity is available. In such cases, property owners shall each pay the full amount of any applicable fees or charges required for service. Common service lines will be sized to provide adequate service to each customer served. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-208. - Public easement. 
No facilities will be installed and/or accepted by the county for maintenance unless the facilities are in a public right-of-way or dedicated easement. Any new easement shall be adequately sized and approved by CCU to accommodate construction and maintenance of any reclaimed water system component. No obstruction whatsoever shall be planted, built, or otherwise created within the limits of the easement or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-209. - Ownership by county. 
All reclaimed water facilities and appurtenances as determined by CCU within dedicated public easements when constructed or accepted by the county, shall become and remain the property of the county. No person shall by payment of any charges provided herein, or by causing any construction of facilities accepted by the county, acquire any interest or right in any of these facilities or any portion thereof, other than the privilege of having their property connected thereto for reclaimed water service in accordance with this article and any amendments thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-210. - Inspections. 
(a)  In order to ascertain and ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and all regulations relating to reclaimed water, the county shall have the right to inspect, secure and disconnect all facilities and devices wherever located which connect to or control any discharge from the reclaimed water distribution system. The inspection shall include the following: 
(1)  A review of the information in the application for service or written agreement. 
(2)  A review of all applicable construction specifications. 
(3)  A cross-connection control review. 
(4)  Such other matters as the director shall determine to be applicable. 
(b)  Upon the execution of an agreement for reclaimed water service, the customer shall be deemed to have consented to the entry by the county upon the property described in said agreement for the purpose of conducting all inspections permitted or required by this article and waives the right to receive further notice from the county of inspections conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The denial of access to an authorized agent or employee of the county to any property receiving reclaimed water service for the purpose of conducting any inspection permitted under this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water service by the county to the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-211. - Liability and indemnity. 
(a)  The county shall not be liable for any damages caused by the use of reclaimed water, provided the reclaimed water has been treated by the department to levels required by applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations for irrigation of lands with public access, or as set forth in subsection 3-8-205(b) of this article. 
(b)  The county shall not be liable for any damages caused by a failure to deliver or supply reclaimed water. 
(c)  The customer shall indemnify the county, its agents and employees, from all claims, damages, judgments and expenses (including attorney fees) incurred by the county as a direct result of the use or discharge of reclaimed water by the customer in violation of the terms of this article or other applicable laws or regulations, including, but not limited to, a cross-connection. 
(d)  The customer shall be liable for any fine or actions imposed on CCU by any local, state, or federal agency as a result of improper or illegal connection made to the reclaimed water system by the customer or agent of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-212. - Fines and penalties for violation of article. 
CCU shall have the authority to impose fines and penalties, as established through resolution, for any violations of local, state and federal rules relative to the provision of reclaimed water service. 
Fines and penalties may include the costs to the county associated with the labor and materials required to correct cross-connections to the reclaimed water system. Applicable fines and penalties may be applied to property owners who are customers of the reclaimed water service, as well as property owners who are not customers of the reclaimed water service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Secs. 3-8-213—3-8-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NEW DEVELOPMENT PROJECT REUSE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3-8-221. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the county to maximize the reuse of treated wastewater and minimize new project impacts on potable water resources. It is the responsibility of the project developer to provide for effluent reuse as a condition precedent to wastewater treatment capacity availability. The county makes no guarantee that service will be available at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-222. - New development projects. 
(a)  Evaluation. For all new development projects, there shall be a requirement for evaluation of the incorporation of use of reclaimed water. This evaluation shall be in the form of an application to the department as part of the utility agreement. The director shall review the water reuse capacity of the project and determine if its incorporation into the reclaimed water system represents a beneficial use of the reclaimed water resource. The water reuse capacity of the project shall be based on the projected irrigated area of the proposed development receiving reclaimed water at an annual average rate of one (1) inch per week and established by an engineering report from a licensed Florida professional engineer and approved by CCU. 
(b)  Mandatory connection. After consideration of the above evaluation, the director shall have the authority to require the development project to connect to the reclaimed water system and comply with this article. If so required, connection to the reclaimed water system shall be a condition precedent to receipt of potable water and wastewater service for the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-223. - Easement dedications. 
The applicant shall dedicate perpetual easements on land designated for reuse transmission and distribution facilities as required to provide reclaimed water service. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-224. - Permits. 
The applicant shall obtain and fulfill, at its expense, all necessary permits, licenses, conditions, and approvals for the initial construction and operation of the on-site reclaimed water irrigation facilities and additional costs of any associated CCU treatment facility operating permit modification or as amended by the agreement for reclaimed water. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Sec. 3-8-225. - Reuse system. 
(a)  The applicant shall construct, at its expense, all necessary on-site reuse facilities in the nature of pipes, pumps, valves, meters, controls, sensors, telemetry, storage lakes and/or tanks, retaining ponds, and spray or sprinkler facilities for irrigation with reclaimed water, and other equipment deemed necessary by the director for the proper and safe operation of the system. 
(b)  The applicant shall construct, at its expense, all necessary transmission lines, pumping stations, and appurtenant improvements for transmitting reclaimed water from the county's transmission system to the applicant's site. 
(c)  Regardless of reclaimed water service availability in proximity to the property at the time of the service application, if the county has published plans to provide reclaimed water service in the region within five (5) years of the service application date, the applicant shall be required to install "dry lines" and associated appurtenant improvements for reclaimed water distribution and service to the project area. All design and construction standards for such work shall meet or exceed the department's specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
DIVISION 3. - SUPERSEDENCE OVER ALL PRIOR AGREEMENTS FOR THE SUPPLY OF RECLAIMED WATER 

Sec. 3-8-226. - Supersedence. 
This article is the master governing law over all agreements between Charlotte County and third-party customers for the supply of reclaimed water. To the extent any provision within a prior agreement shall conflict with the language herein, this article shall supersede and be the controlling document. All prior agreements between Charlotte County and third-party customers for the supply of reclaimed water will be reviewed for compliance with this article, and replaced if deemed by the director to be in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-041, § 1, 5-22-07) 
Secs. 3-8-227—3-8-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COUNTY-OWNED POTABLE WATER SYSTEM[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-038, §§ 5, 6, adopted Sep. 25, 2018, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 3-8-231—3-8-235, pertained to central water system and derived from Ord. No. 95-044, §§ 1.01, 2.01, 3.02, 4.01, adopted Sep. 19, 1995; Ord. No. 97-002, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 21, 1997; and Ord. No. 2015-050, § 6, adopted Nov. 10, 2005. 

Sec. 3-8-231. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article are applicable to real property located in the Charlotte County Utility Service Area. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 5, 9-25-18) 
Sec. 3-8-232. - County-owned potable water system availability. 
(a)  Availability, for purposes of this section 3-8-232, means the county-owned potable water system has adequate permitted water capacity to provide potable water, and a potable water line exists in a public easement or right-of-way that abuts the property, or is within one hundred (100) feet of the property, as accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements. 
(b)  Where a county-owned potable water line is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property, the property owner is responsible for all costs necessary to connect the property to the county-owned potable water system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 5, 9-25-18) 
Sec. 3-8-233. - Mandatory connection to public potable water system required. 
(a)  All developed property must connect the plumbing system for any structure on the property to an available public potable water line. Said connection must be made within one hundred eighty (180) days after written notification by the public utility that the system is available for connection. 
(b)  Available, for purposes of this section 3-8-233, means that the potable water system is capable of being connected to the plumbing of a structure and has adequate permitted capacity to supply potable water to the structure, and: 
(1)  For a residential lot or any structure that has an estimated water usage of one thousand (1,000) gallons per day or less, a water line exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property line of the lot or structure; or 
(2)  For a non-residential structure with an estimated water usage of more than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day, a water line exists in an easement or right-of-way that abuts the property or is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line of the structure as accessed via existing rights-of-way or easements; or 
(3)  For proposed residential subdivisions with more than fifty (50) lots, for proposed commercial subdivisions with more than five (5) lots or for areas zoned or used for an industrial or manufacturing purpose, a county-owned water distribution line exists within one-fourth (¼) mile of the development as measured and accessed via existing easements or rights-of-way. 
(c)  For property located in Charlotte County Utility's service area, potable water charges shall be in effect upon connection or beginning one hundred eighty (180) days from notification of the availability of water service, whichever is less. Failure to pay such charges will result in initiation of Charlotte County Utility's delinquency process, including, but not limited to, initiation of the code enforcement process. 
(d)  For property located in Charlotte County Utility's service area, all charges, including late charges and interest, for potable water services rendered to any real property by the county and which remain unpaid when due, shall become a lien against and upon the real property and such lien shall be superior and paramount to the interest on such parcel or property of any owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee or other person except the lien of county taxes and shall be on parity with the lien of any such county taxes. Nothing provided herein with respect to the county's lien authority shall affect or preclude any other remedy authorized by law or ordinance that the county may have to collect delinquent charges or fees. 
(e)  Non-use of well for drinking purposes. Property owners who are required to connect to a public potable water system are required to convert any existing potable water wells on the property to irrigation wells or plug and abandon such wells in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations and the well shall no longer be used for human consumption. 
(f)  Any person failing to connect their property to an available public potable water line within one hundred eighty (180) days of written notification of availability, or failing to convert, plug or abandon an existing well, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation for each day in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days that the property is not connected to the potable water system or that the well has not been converted, plugged or abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2018-038, § 5, 9-25-18) 
Secs. 3-8-234—3-8-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ON-SITE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, adopted Aug. 24, 2010, amended Art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, §§ 3-8-250—3-8-263, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-065, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 1998; and Ord. No. 2007-061, § 1, adopted Aug. 28, 2007. 

Sec. 3-8-250. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Charlotte County On-site Sewage Treatment and Disposal System Inspection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-251. - Scope. 
This article supplements the minimum standards and permitting requirements contained in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C., and F.S. section 381.0065, and any subsequent amendments thereto. Where the provisions of this article are more restrictive than those contained in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C., or F.S. section 381.0065, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-252. - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this article are to require pump-out and inspection of certain septic systems every five (5) years in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, residents and visitors of the county and improve water quality by decreasing nutrient loading from improperly functioning septic systems located in areas near canals and surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-253. - Jurisdiction. 
This article shall apply to the unincorporated area of Charlotte County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 3-8-254. - Applicability of article. 
This article applies to all Aerobic Treatment Units (ATUs) regardless of location, and to all non-ATU on-site sewage systems that are located within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the closest point of the drainfield, to a canal, or other surface waters. This article and the requirements herein, except where noted, shall be the responsibility of the Charlotte County Health Department (CCHD), a division of the Florida Department of Health (FDOH). 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-255. - Definitions. 
Where a word or phrase is not defined in this article, the definition provided in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C., or F.S. section 381.0065, shall be used. 
Aerobic treatment unit (ATU) means a sewage treatment unit which introduces air into sewage to provide aerobic biochemical stabilization within a treatment receptacle. 
Approved maintenance entity means any person or business entity which has been licensed to conduct business in Charlotte County and has been issued a written permit by CCHD to provide maintenance services associated with approved on site aerobic treatment units. 
CCHD means Charlotte County Health Department, a division of FDOH. 
FDOH means the Florida Department of Health. 
On-site sewage treatment and disposal system (OSTDS) means a system that contains a standard subsurface, filled, or mound drainfield system; an aerobic treatment unit; a graywater system tank; a laundry wastewater system tank; a septic tank; a grease interceptor; a pump tank; a solids or effluent pump; a waterless, incinerating, or organic waste-composting toilet; or a sanitary pit privy that is installed or proposed to be installed beyond the building sewer on land of the owner or on other land to which the owner has the legal right to install a system. This term does not include package sewage treatment facilities and other treatment works regulated under F.S. Ch. 403. 
Permit means an on-site sewage treatment and disposal system construction permit issued by FDOH before an OSTDS may be installed, repaired, altered, modified, abandoned or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2014-013, § 1, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 16, 6-14-16; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-256. - Regulations. 
(a)  Permits and construction: 
(1)  No portion of an OSTDS shall be installed in Charlotte County until an application for a permit, on Form DH-4015, has been submitted to the CCHD, Any newly constructed OSTDS, regardless of drainfield size or sewage flow rate, shall be designed by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Florida. The CCHD shall require the submission of detailed system construction plans for review and approval, including the site evaluation, as prepared by the engineer. All plans and forms shall be dated, signed and sealed by the engineer. 
(2)  The OSTDS design engineer shall provide one (1) copy of the system operating and maintenance instructions in the form of a manual to the ultimate owner of the system. 
(3)  All septic contractors, plumbers, and class D wastewater treatment plant operators who wish to inspect, modify, repair, service, or install septic systems in Charlotte County shall first apply for and receive approval for a Charlotte County Septic Contractors Permit from the CCHD. 
(b)  ATU maintenance contracts: 
(1)  Approved maintenance entities shall, whenever possible, make the ATU maintenance contract renewal date and the ATU operating permit renewal dates the same; 
(2)  Each ATU must be inspected by an approved maintenance entity at least every six (6) months. ATUs serving commercial establishments shall be inspected by an approved maintenance entity every three (3) months. The maintenance entity shall furnish to the property owner/lessee and the CCHD a copy of any inspection performed, within seven (7) days after the inspection, indicating that all steps and procedures recommended by the manufacturer were performed. Inspection reports shall indicate the system owner or building lessee, the street address of the system, the CCHD permit number, the date of system inspection or service and a statement as to the maintenance or service performed. 
(c)  Inspection and pumpout of non-ATU on-site sewage systems: 
(1)  All non-ATU on-site sewage systems located within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the closest point of the drainfield to a canal or other surface waters, shall be inspected by a representative of the CCHD at least once every five (5) years. 
(2)  All non-ATU on-site sewage systems located within three hundred (300) feet, as measured from the closest point of the drainfield to a canal or other surface waters, shall be pumped empty at least once every five (5) years by a licensed septic tank contractor or plumber equipped and certified to pump on-site sewage systems. Such contractor/plumber shall be licensed by the CCHD. Such contractor/plumber shall furnish a copy of the pumpout certification to the CCHD. The contractor/plumber shall submit a written report that includes a completed certification form (as prescribed by the FDOH) as well as a description of the septic tank's integrity, areas of concern the tank's location and any repairs or adjustments made on site. The report shall include copies of photographs taken of the tank pumped empty. The contractor/plumber will provide a copy of the report including the items listed above to both the homeowner and the CCHD within five (5) days of completion date. 
(3)  Failure of a property owner to comply with the pump-out and inspection requirements of this article or to timely complete any required replacement or repair of a failing septic system shall be a violation of this Code. 
(4)  Existing non-ATU septic systems subject to the pump-out and inspection requirements of this article may be released from further pump-out and inspection requirements provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The non-ATU septic system is located in an area where a municipal service benefit unit (MSBU) has been created to fund the installation of a central sewer collection system; and 
b.  The non-ATU septic system is functioning properly; and 
1.  The property where the non-ATU septic system is located will be able to physically connect the plumbing system on the property to the new sewer collection system and abandon the non-ATU septic system within one (1) year of the date the release is effective; Annual extensions beyond one (1) year may be obtained, at owner's cost, from FDOH, upon application, satisfactory inspection, and approval by FDOH; or 
2.  The property where the non-ATU septic system is located is part of a county plumbing contract where the anticipated date of connection is within two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2014-013, § 2, 5-13-14; Ord. No. 2020-025, § 1, 6-23-20) 
Sec. 3-8-257. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-013, § 3, adopted May 13, 2014, repealed § 3-8-257, which pertained to testing and laboratories and derived from Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, adopted Aug. 24, 2010. 
Sec. 3-8-258 - Septage and portable toilet pumpout companies. 
(a)  Septage pumpout companies that clean and remove septage or grease from residential or commercial OSTDS and grease interceptors that are located in Charlotte County shall file a written report of their activities with the CCHD monthly within ten (10) days of the end of the activity month. The report shall include: the date collected, street address location of the OSTDS serviced, whether OSTDS serves a residence or business, whether grease or septage was collected, the liquid volume of septage or grease removed, the treatment facility designation of the waste, and the signature and printed name of the responsible licensed contractor. 
(b)  For tanks that are dual compartment, both compartments shall be emptied. For tanks with outlet filters, the filters shall be cleaned of septage. For all septic tanks emptied, the contractor shall note on the customer's receipt: the tank volume, the presence of a solids deflection or outlet filter device and whether the tank is water tight. 
(c)  Portable toilet septage companies operating in Charlotte County shall file a written report of their activities with the CCHD monthly within ten (10) days of the end of the activity month. The report shall include: the date of service, the volume of portable toilet septage collected daily, the treatment facility destination of the waste, and the signature and printed name of the responsible licensed owner or manager. 
(d)  Any venue or activity using more than one (1) portable toilet or holding tank shall obtain a permit from the CCHD. The permit shall include inspection of the facility and assurance of proper hand sanitation, to include hand washing facilities. Existing CCHD inspection and re-inspection fees apply to this section. The fee will not apply to portable facilities used for disaster response; however, the sanitation requirements will be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2014-013, § 4, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 3-8-259. - Septage treatment and landspreading. 
(a)  FDOH permitted septage treatment and landspread facilities shall file a written report of their activities with the CCHD monthly within ten (10) days of the end of the activity month. The report shall contain all information required by FDOH to be retained by the permitted operator. 
(b)  During wet weather conditions, when the ground water table rises to within twenty-four (24) inches or less of ground surface, landspreading of septage shall be suspended, and shall not be recommenced until at least two (2) calendar days after the water table subsides to twenty-four (24) inches or more below ground surface. Water table elevation shall be observed in monitoring wells daily and recorded on monthly reports. 
(c)  During suspended landspreading periods, all septage shall be treated in accordance with FDOH rule, and then held in storage at a minimum pH of eleven (11.0). When storage capacity is ninety (90) percent filled, receipt of septage at the facility must cease, and any additional septage must be treated and disposed of at another FDOH or DEP permitted facility. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 3-8-260. - Variances. 
Requests for variances from this article shall be made to the CCHD on forms provided. The CCHD will review the request and make recommendations to the board of zoning appeals ("BZA") concerning the merits of each request. The BZA may grant variances in hardship cases which may be less restrictive than the provisions specified in this article, however, a variance may not be granted under this section until the BZA is satisfied that: 
(1)  The hardship was not caused intentionally by the action of the applicant; 
(2)  There is no reasonable alternative, taking into consideration factors such as cost, for the treatment of the sewage; and 
(3)  The discharge from the on-site sewage treatment and disposal system will not adversely affect the health of the applicant or the public or significantly degrade the groundwater or surface waters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2016-024, § 17, 6-14-16) 
Sec. 3-8-261. - Fees. 
Upon recommendation of the director of CCHD, the Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County ("BCC") shall establish by resolution fees charged for services provided by the CCHD. Such services may include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Permit for OSTDS (includes CCHD review, permit issuance, two (2) construction inspections, and DOH state research fee; 
(2)  Permit for operation of ATUs; 
(3)  Variance applications; 
(4)  County permit for repair OSTDS (includes county surcharge); 
(5)  "After the fact" permit fee (in addition to regular OSTDS fee); 
(6)  Subdivision plan review where OSTDS are to be used up to fifty (50) lots over fifty (50) lots. 
Fees shall be deposited in the CCHD trust fund for use exclusively in this program. Fees may be amended by the BCC by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10; Ord. No. 2014-013, § 5, 5-13-14) 
Sec. 3-8-262. - Compliance and enforcement. 
(a)  Failure of any person or entity to comply with any applicable requirement of this article shall be a violation of the Charlotte County Code and all remedies available to the CCHD, the FDOH and Charlotte County may be used to enforce this law. While any such violation continues, no certificate of occupancy, development permit or any other permit or approval shall be issued for any use or development of the property and any existing permits may be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty provided by law for the violation of any provisions of this article, the BCC, CCHD or FDOH may bring suit to enjoin, restrain or otherwise prevent the violation of this article. 
(c)  The BCC, CCHD or FDOH has the authority at all times to take any action necessary to prevent imminent danger to the public health, welfare and safety. 
(d)  The foregoing remedies shall not be exclusive and the BCC, CCHD and FDOH may invoke other remedies available. 
(e)  Routine compliance activities, initial notification of violation and preparation of legal referral case reports shall be the responsibility of the CCHD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 3-8-263. - Inspection. 
Employees or agents of the CCHD, FDOH and BCC shall have the right to enter private property for the purpose of monitoring or inspecting on-site sewage treatment and disposal systems, investigating complaints or alleged violations of this article or Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C., or Chapter 381, F.S., or other similar purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2010-053, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Chapter 3-9 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The zoning regulations in this chapter became effective on December 8, 1981, and were confirmed by Res. No. 81-123 on December 15, 1981. Res. No. 81-123 reads as follows: 
"A Resolution Adopting Amended Zoning Regulations and Zoning Districts. 
Whereas, the Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County did on the 8th day of December, 1981, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 63-1209, Laws of Florida, and all applicable general laws, amend the zoning regulations and zoning districts for Charlotte County; and 
Whereas, it is desired to define and adopt said zoning regulations and zoning districts as amended; and 
Whereas, maps delineating the boundaries of the amended zoning districts, a volume entitled Zoning Regulations for Charlotte County, Florida and various memoranda showing proposed changes to said maps and volume and the action taken thereon by the Board were presented to the Clerk of Circuit Court at the conclusion of the Commission Meeting of December 8th, 1981; 
Now, therefore, be it resolved: 
1. That said maps as amended by said memoranda be and hereby are adopted as the official zoning atlas for Charlotte County, Florida, as required by Section 3 of said regulations. 
2. That said volume of zoning regulations as amended by said memoranda be and hereby are adopted as the zoning regulations of Charlotte County, Florida. 
3. That said zoning atlas and zoning regulations as amended shall be effective as of the date of their enactment, to wit: December 8th, 1981." 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 1-2; housing, Ch. 1-8; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 1-10; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2; fire prevention code, Ch. 3-3; impact fees, Ch. 3-3.5; mobile homes, Ch. 3-4; planning and development, Ch. 3-5; subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7; taxing districts, Pt. IV; zoning powers of board of commissioners, § 3-5-41 et seq.; Charlotte Public Safety Unit, § 4-3-211 et seq. 
State Law reference— Zoning regulations, F.S. § 125.01(1)(h); land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3202 et seq. 
Annotation—The county was not authorized to exercise zoning powers to bar drilling for oil, gas or minerals three (3) miles offshore from the county, Kirk v. Flowers, No. 6720, 12th Cir. (1967). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-9-1. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-9-2. - Rules of construction; definitions. 
In this chapter, the present tense includes the future, the singular number includes the plural and the masculine includes the feminine and the neuter; the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definitions. 
Abandoned vehicle: Any vehicle which is unlicensed or, by outward appearance, not operable. 
Abut: To physically touch or border upon or to share a common property line. 
Abutting property: Unless specifically stated otherwise within this chapter, "abutting property" shall mean properties having a boundary line, or point or portion thereof, in common with no intervening public right-of-way. 
Access, vehicular: The principal means of vehicular ingress and egress to abutting property from a street right-of-way or easement. 
Accessory building or structure: See "building or structure, accessory." 
Accessory use: See "Use, accessory." 
Acre: A measure of land containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Addition: A structure added to the original structure after the certificate of occupancy has been issued for the original structure. 
Adjoining lot or land: See "Abutting property." 
Adult arcade means a place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or token operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein. 
Adult bookstore: An establishment maintained for the sale or distribution to adults of material, the sale of which to juveniles would be prohibited by Florida Statutes. 
State Law reference— Distribution of harmful materials to juveniles, F.S. § 847.012. 
Adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store means an establishment that sells or offers adult material for sale or rent for commercial gain, unless the establishment demonstrates that: 
(1)  Admission to the establishment is not restricted pursuant to chapter 847, Florida Statutes; and 
(2)  The individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprise less than twenty-five (25) percent of the individual items publicly displayed in the establishment as stock in trade and are not accessible to minors at the establishment. 
Adult booth means a separate enclosure inside an adult use establishment, accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term adult booth includes, but is not limited to a peep booth show, adult arcade booth, or other booth used to view adult material. The term adult booth does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment, or a restroom. 
Adult congregate living facility shall mean any Florida department of health and rehabilitative services licensed building or buildings, section of a building, or distinct portion of a building, residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide, for a period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours, housing, food service, and one (1) or more personal services for adult resident clients, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who require such services. 
Adult dancing establishment means an establishment where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
Adult exhibition: An establishment maintained for the exhibition for monetary consideration of motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, presentations or representations, the exhibiting of which to a minor would be prohibited by Florida Statutes. See also "Detrimental uses." 
State Law reference— Exposing minors to harmful motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, presentations or representations, F.S. § 847.013. 
Adult material means: Any one (1) or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, paintings, drawings or other publications or graphic media, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or disks, slides, or other visual representations, or recordings, or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult photographic or modeling studio means any business establishment which offers or advertises as its primary business stock in trade, the use of its premises for the purpose of photographing or exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or the modeling of apparel that exhibits specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means an enclosed building or an enclosed space within a building, or an open air area used for presenting either filmed or live plays, dances, or other performances, either by individuals or groups distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. An establishment which has adult booths or an adult arcade is considered to be an adult theater. 
Aircraft landing strip: A facility whose primary purpose is to accommodate the takeoff and landing of noncommercial passenger aircraft. 
Airport: A place where aircraft can land and takeoff, usually equipped with hangers, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
Alley: Any public or private right-of-way intended to be used as a secondary means of access or service to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alteration: Any change in size, shape, occupancy, character or use of a building or structure. Alteration does not include customary maintenance or repairs. 
Apartment: A single dwelling unit in a multiple-family dwelling; a separate housing unit including at least a bath, kitchen and living and sleeping accommodations. 
Applicant: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity, or their duly authorized representative, commencing proceedings under this chapter. 
Appurtenance: Something added to another, more important thing; accessory. 
Automobile wrecking or wrecking yard: The dismantling, crushing, shredding or disassembling of used motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts (see also "Junkyard"). 
Automotive sales and service: Service stations, paint and body repair shops, automotive repair garages and the sale or storage of new and used automobiles. 
Automotive service station: An establishment the principal business of which is the retail dispensing of automotive fuels and oil, but which provides mechanical services. 
Automotive vehicle: Any self-propelled vehicle or conveyance designed to transport persons, animals, freight, merchandise or any substance, to include tractors, construction equipment, machinery or motorcycles, but not mopeds or motorized bicycles. 
[Banner, flag or pennant: Any cloth, plastic, paper, or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to, or appended on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle.] [2] 
Bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, or nightclub: Any establishment devoted primarily to the sale and on-premises drinking of malt, vinous or other alcoholic beverages. 
Bay window: A window projecting outward from the wall of a building forming a recess in a room, however, not a window supported on a foundation extending beyond the main wall of a building. 
Board: The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Board of zoning appeals: The board having the functions, powers and duties as set forth in section 3-9-6 herein. 
Boardinghouse: See "Rooming and boarding house." 
Boat or watercraft: Any structure designed or made to float on the water, including a floating structure, excluding floating docks, permanently anchored to a dock or to the shore. 
Buffer strip: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another and/or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances. Buffer strips may be required to include fences or berms, as well as shrubs and trees. 
Buildable area: That area within and bounded by required yards and setbacks. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof impervious to weather and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. This definition shall include tents, awnings, cabanas or vehicles situated on private property and serving in any way the function of a building. 
Building or structure, accessory: A building or structure which is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal building or to the principal use of the premises and located on the same premises (see "Building, principal"). 
Building, conventional: 
(1)  A building, built up on-site and upon its own permanent foundation, constructed of basic materials such as wood, masonry or metal or minimally prefabricated components such as roof trusses, wall panels, and bathroom/kitchen modules and conformable to the locally adopted building, electrical, plumbing and other related codes; or 
(2)  A "manufactured building" is a closed structure, building assembly, or system or subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating or other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished building or as part of a finished building, which shall include but not be limited to residential, commercial, institutional, storage and industrial structures. "Manufactured building" may also mean, at the option of the manufacturer, any building of open construction made or assembled in manufacturing facilities away from the building site for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site, and which has also been certified to comply with the state department of veteran and community affairs. The "term manufactured building" does not include mobile homes. The term "manufactured building" shall be synonymous with "modular homes." 
Building, height of: The vertical distance measured from the lowest minimum habitable floor elevation for which a building permit may be issued to the highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof, or to the mid-point height between the eaves or the top of the external wall, whichever is higher, and the ridge of gable, hip, shed, and gambrel roofs. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which it is located. An attached carport, garage, shed or other building shall comprise a part of the principal building and shall be subject to all regulations applicable to the principal building. A detached and structurally independent garage, carport or other structure shall conform to the requirements of an accessory building. 
Building official: The person duly authorized by the board of county commissioners and delegated the responsibilities for the administration and enforcement of the county's building codes. 
Building site: The lot upon which a building has been or is proposed to be erected. 
Bulk storage: The storage of chemicals, petroleum products and other materials in above-ground containers for subsequent resale to distributors or retail dealers or outlets. (Note: Bulk storage is essentially a warehousing operation as the key part of the definition is that the products are sold for eventual resale and not directly to the consuming public.) 
Bulkhead line: The mean high-water line on waterfront property defined by an existing seawall or survey. 
Business services: Any commercial activity primarily conducted in a office, not involving the sale of goods or commodities available in the office, and not dispensing personal services, but including such businesses as real estate brokers or agents, insurance agencies, stock brokers, automobile brokers, counselors, consultants, accountants, collection agencies, title and abstract companies, income tax services, travel agencies, advertising agencies, studios of art, music, dancing or photography, laboratories, business or stenographic schools and any similar office-type use. 
Campground: Any area where two (2) or more sites for tents, tent campers, truck-car campers or travel trailers are offered for sleeping or eating accommodations, most generally to the transient public, where there is direct remuneration in money or money's worth to the owner or indirect benefit to the owner in connection with a related business. 
Campground, primitive: A campsite which is unimproved (no water or electricity) and primarily used for tents and no motorized recreation vehicles. A primitive campground may consist of an office, general storage (convenience food store) and central bathhouse with utilities. 
Camping trailer: See "Recreational vehicle." 
Car wash: Establishment primarily engaged in washing cars or in furnishing facilities for the self-service washing of cars. 
Carport: A freestanding or attached structure, consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams, unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least one (1) side, and designed or used for the storage of motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
Cemetery: Land set apart for the sole purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or animals and for the erection of customary markers, monuments and mausoleums. 
Centerline: A line bisecting and lying everywhere equidistant between the boundaries of an object. For a road, the boundaries shall be construed as the right-of-way lines; for a body of water, the boundaries shall be the shoreline or bulkhead line thereof. 
Child care facility: Any child care center or child care arrangement which provides child care for more than five (5) children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not operated for profit, except that the following are not included: public schools and non-public schools and their integral programs; summer camps having children in full-time residence; summer day camps; and Bible schools normally conducted during vacation periods. The provisions of this definition shall not apply to a child care facility which is an integral part of church or parochial schools conducting regularly scheduled classes, courses of study or educational programs accredited by, or by a member of, an organization which publishes and requires compliance with its standards for health, safety and sanitation; however, such facilities shall meet minimum requirements of the applicable local governing body as to health, sanitation and safety. 
Church: See "House of worship." 
Club, private: Associations and organizations of a civic, fraternal or social character to which public access or use is restricted. The term "private club" shall not include nightclubs, cocktail lounges, taverns or bottle clubs. 
Cluster housing: A grouping of dwelling units, with no dwelling unit located above another dwelling unit, on a building site under unified control at the time of development, without regard to required lot size or interior setbacks. 
Coastal construction control line: The line established pursuant to state law seaward of which construction may not be undertaken without a permit from the state department of natural resources. 
Commercial fishery: Land or structures used as a commercial establishment for the receiving, processing, packaging, storage and wholesale or retail distribution and sale of food products of the sea. Such land or structures may include facilities for the docking, loading and unloading, fueling, icing, and provisions of vessels, and for the drying, maintenance and storage of nets, traps and buoys. 
Compatible: Capable of orderly, efficient integration and operation with other land uses and zoning districts. 
Completely enclosed building: A building separated on all sides from adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors. 
Comprehensive plan: The document, and its amendments, adopted by the board pursuant to F.S. Chapter 163, for the orderly and balanced economic, social, physical, environmental and fiscal development of the county. 
Condominium: The form of real property ownership defined by Florida law as such. 
State Law reference— Condominium Act, F.S. § 718.101 et seq. 
Contiguous: See "abutting." 
Convenience food and beverage store: A store which specializes in convenience products and other commodities and which normally is open to the public beyond the normal sales hours of other retail stores. 
Country club: See "Club, country." 
Day care center, adult: A facility or establishment which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide basic services such as but not limited to a protective setting, social or leisure-time activities, self-care training and/or nutritional services to three (3) or more adults not related by blood or marriage to the owner or operator, who require such services. This definition shall not be interpreted to include overnight care. 
Day care center, child: Any child care center or child care arrangement which provides child care for more than five (5) children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not operated for profit, except that the following are not included: public schools and nonprofit schools and their integral programs; summer camps having children in full-time residence; summer day camps; and Bible schools normally conducted during vacation periods. The provisions of this definition shall not apply to a child care facility which is an integral part of church or parochial schools conducting regularly scheduled classes, courses of study or educational programs accredited by, or by a member of, an organization which publishes and requires compliance with its standards for health, safety and sanitation; however, such facilities shall meet minimum requirements of the applicable local governing body as to health, sanitation and safety. 
Density, residential: The number of residential dwelling units permitted per acre of land within the parcel. The term "density" refers to the number of residential dwelling units permitted per gross acre of land and is determined by dividing the number of units by the total area of land within the boundaries of a lot or parcel. In the determination of the number of residential dwelling units to be permitted on a specific parcel of land, a fractional unit shall not entitle the applicant to an additional unit. 
Detoxification center: A medical facility open twenty-four (24) hours a day meeting comparable standards to a hospital or nursing home. Such facility shall be for the temporary emergency shelter of intoxicated persons, or those persons suffering from alcoholism, drug abuse or other similar conditions for the purpose of detoxification. 
Development review committee: The DRC is composed of members designated by the county administrator. The individuals shall represent the following departments: zoning, planning, engineering, fire prevention, utilities and any other department designated by the county administrator. 
Development standards: The minimum requirements set forth in each zoning classification regulating the location, height, bulk, use and other aspects of development within such zoning classifications. 
Development of regional impact (DRI): Any development which, because of its character, magnitude or location, would have a substantial effect upon the health, safety or welfare of citizens of more than one (1) county as defined in F.S. Chapter 380. 
Dock or pier: A structure extending over water for use as a landing place for watercraft or as a walkway or other water-dependent uses. 
Dog kennel: Any location where the boarding, breeding, or training of dogs is conducted as a business. 
Drive-thru facility: An establishment where a patron is provided products or services without departing from his automotive vehicle. "Drive-thru," "drive-in" and "drive-up" are synonymous. 
Dwelling unit: A room or rooms connected together, which could constitute a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for a family, for owner occupancy, or for lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure, and containing sleeping and sanitary facilities and one (1) kitchen. The term "dwelling unit" shall not include rooms in hotels, motels or institutional facilities. See also "Housing unit" and "Living unit." 
Dwelling unit, types: 
(1)  Duplex: A single, freestanding, conventional building or a single lot, designed for two (2) dwelling units under single ownership, or wherein each dwelling unit is separately owned or leased but the lot is held under common ownership. 
(2)  Single-family residence: A single, freestanding, conventional building designed for one (1) dwelling unit and which could be used for occupancy by one (1) family. 
(3)  Townhouse: A single-family living unit in a group of similar units situated on its own lot or parcel of land, having no side yards or setbacks from adjacent townhouses in the same group and no openings in side walls. 
(4)  Mobile homes: Also includes the term "manufactured home." A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and which is built upon an interval chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. For the purpose of determining length, the length of a mobile home is the distance from the exterior wall nearest to the drawbar and the coupling mechanism to the exterior of the wall at the opposite end of the home where such walls enclose living or other space. 
(5)  Multiple-family building: A group of three (3) or more dwelling units within a single conventional building, attached side by side, or one above another, or both, and wherein each dwelling unit may be individually owned or leased but the land on which the building is located is under common or single ownership. 
Easement: A grant of a right to use land for specified purposes. It is nonpossessory interest in land granted for limited use purposes. 
Eaves: The extension or overhang of a roof, measured from the outer face of the supporting wall or column to the farthest point of the overhanging structure. 
Emergency services: Police, fire, rescue or ambulance but not funeral home services. 
Employee means a person who works or performs or provides services in connection with a sexually oriented business, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage by the owner or manager of the premises, or is an independent contractor, provided such person has a substantial or consistent relationship with the business of, or entertainment services provided by, the sexually oriented business. The term employee includes performers, managers and assistant managers, stockpersons, tellers, and operators. The term employee includes a person who pays a form of consideration to the owner or manager of the sexually oriented business for the privilege of working, performing, or exposing his or her specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
Essential services: Utility service installations other than distribution and collection systems. Water wells and septic tanks are not deemed essential services. 
Existing grade: The vertical location of the ground surface prior to excavating or filling. 
Fabrication and assembly: The manufacturing from standardized parts of a distinct object differing from the individual components. (Note: The term "fabrication and assembly" often is used to describe a general class of permitted uses. It usually involves materials with form and substance (as opposed to liquid or gas) with a physical, as opposed to chemical, mating or joining of individual parts.) 
Family: One (1) person or a group of persons interrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption, occupying a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities. The persons thus constituting a family may also include, but not exceed, a combined total of four (4) guests and domestic servants. 
Family day care home: An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for no more than five (5) preschool children from more than one (1) unrelated family and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. For purposes of determining whether the operation of a residence as a family day care home constitutes a valid residential use under the provisions of this chapter, the maximum number of five (5) preschool children allowable includes preschool children living in the home and preschool children received for day care who are not related to the residence caregiver. In addition to the maximum of five (5) preschool children, elementary school siblings of the preschool children received for day care may also be cared for outside of school hours, provided the total number of children, including the caregiver's own and those related to the caregiver, does not exceed ten (10). 
Farmers' market: A location where, as an accessory use subject to section 3-9-91, Accessory use—Farmers' market, as may be amended, agricultural and organic items, arts and crafts, or other similar goods, may be offered for sale. Resale of retail items is not permitted. 
Filling station: See "Automotive service station." 
Fish farm (aquaculture): An area devoted to the cultivation of fish and other seafood for commercial sale. 
Flea market: See "Market, open." 
Floor area: Floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of all floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. As an alternative, the applicant may measure from the interior face of the exterior walls to arrive at a calculation of floor area. Should this option be used, the applicant shall be required to submit an affidavit, certified by a registered architect or engineer, as to its accuracy. 
Garage, parking: A building or portion thereof designed or used for commercial parking of motor vehicles or boats. 
Garage, private: A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building, situated on the same lot as the principal building, or on a contiguous lot under the same ownership, for the storage of motor vehicles or boats, with no facilities for mechanical services or repair of a commercial or public nature. For the purpose of these zoning regulations, a carport shall be considered as a garage. 
Garage, repair: A building designed and used for the storage, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles, including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint and body work. 
Garage or yard sale: An informal sale of used household or personal articles (such as furniture, tools or clothing) held on the seller's own premises, or conducted by several people on one of the seller's own premises. 
Greenbelt: An open area which may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state surrounding development or used as a buffer between land uses or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area. 
Group home facility: A building except for an "adult congregate living facility" used as a dwelling for a group of unrelated persons living together as a unit under the supervision of a local or state agency. Such facility includes the term "foster care home." 
Guest home: A dwelling unit in a building separate from and in addition to the principal residential building on a lot, intended for intermittent or temporary occupancy without compensation. 
Heliport: An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the loading and takeoff of helicopters, and including auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Helistop: A heliport, but without auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment. 
Home occupation: An occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as an accessory use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and operated in accordance with the application provisions of section 3-9-79. 
Hospice: A facility designed to provide comfort and relief for the emotional and physical needs of the terminally ill. 
Hospital: A building or group of buildings having facilities for overnight care of one (1) or more human patients, providing services to inpatients and medical care to the sick and injured, which may include as related facilities laboratories, outpatient services, training facilities, central service facilities and staff facilities; provided, however, that any related facility shall be incidental and subordinate to the principal hospital use and operation. 
Hospital, animal: Any structure or premises used primarily and essentially for the medical care of ill, injured or disabled animals. 
Hotel, motel, inn: A commercial establishment that offers transient accommodations to the public, and such use shall not be located within any residential districts nor within any residential portion of a mixed-use development. 
Houseboat: A boat containing facilities, permanent or temporary, for cooking, bathing, sleeping or the disposal or storage of waste water or refuse. 
House of worship: Any building used for nonprofit purposes by any duly constituted and legally established sect, primarily intended to be used as a place of worship, together with customary accessory uses. 
Impervious surface: A surface which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. The term includes streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and similar structures. 
Incineration: The controlled process by which solid, liquid or gaseous combustible wastes are burned and changed into gases and residue containing little or no combustible material. 
Incinerator: An engineered apparatus used to burn waste substances and in which the combustion factors, temperature, retention time, turbulence, and combustion air may be controlled. 
Industrial park: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics and compatibility. 
Industry: Any activity involving the manufacturing of any commodity, including the assembly, packaging, canning, bottling or processing of any item. To change any commodity in composition, form, size, shape, texture or appearance is deemed to be an industrial process. 
Intensity: A measurement of the degree of customarily nonresidential uses based on use, size, impact, bulk, shape, height, coverage, sewage generation, water demand, traffic generation, or floor area ratios. 
Junk: Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, papers, trash, rubber, debris, including construction and land-clearing debris, waste, and including wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture, iron, steel and other scrap materials. 
Junkyard: A location, establishment or place of business which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk; the term shall include all dumps and landfills except those operated under the terms of a currently valid permit issued by the state department of environmental regulation. 
Laboratory: A facility equipped for experimentation, research or testing. The following three (3) classes of laboratories are provided for in the zoning regulations: 
(1)  Class 1: Laboratories for the testing of materials, such as soil laboratories, product testing laboratories, and stress testing laboratories. These laboratories may emit dust and noise. 
(2)  Class 2: Analytical laboratories for the testing of soils, water and other substances for contaminants and/or natural characteristics. These laboratories typically test for and handle substances which are deleterious to human health. They are often small-quantity hazard waste generators. 
(3)  Class 3: Medical laboratories, forensic testing laboratories and other laboratories not typically handling hazardous materials of such a quantity to be a small-quantity generator under EPA rules. These laboratories are typically clean, but may handle radioactive materials, human and/or animal tissue and other substances which, when properly handled, pose negligible threat to human health. 
Land use: The development that has occurred on the land, the development that is proposed by a developer on the land, or the use that is permitted or permissible on the land under the comprehensive plan or element or portion thereof, or land development regulations, as the context may indicate. 
Landscaping: Grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, berms and complementary structural landscape features such as rock, fountains, sculpture, decorative walls or structures and tree wells. 
Live aboard: The use of the cooking, bathing, wastewater or refuse disposal or storage facilities of any watercraft which has not been underway in open water within the preceding twenty-four (24) hours. 
Living area: That area of a dwelling unit enclosed and protected from the elements, including interior halls, closets, utility and storage areas, but excluding garages and carports, and utility or storage areas contained therein, screened porches, unenclosed areas, cellars, basements and attics. The living area of a mobile home shall be determined by the area of the basic unit only, and shall not include additions such as cabanas, carports, storage areas or screened enclosures. Living area is determined by exterior dimensions. 
Loading space, off-street: A space logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
Local planning agency: The planning and zoning board performing the functions set forth in F.S. section 163.3174, as well as functions set forth in section 3-9-5. 
Lot includes "plot," "parcel" or "tract" and is a piece, parcel, tract or plot of ground contained within the property lines of a specific area as described by metes and bounds or by lot, block and subdivision identification as recorded in the public records of Charlotte County, Florida, including land within easements, but excluding land within any street, road or other right-of-way. 
Lot area: The horizontal land area computed in square feet or acres. Small boat slips or other minor indentation shall be considered upland of the shoreline or the bulkhead line when computing waterfront property areas. 
Lot, corner: Any lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets and abutting such streets on two (2) adjacent sides. 
Lot coverage: The total area in square feet of all buildings and structures located on a lot. Maximum percentage of lot coverage permitted shall not include covered parking areas without side or rear walls, nor projections of eaves, stairways or fire escapes, but shall include any garage, carport, porch or storage area attached to the principal building. Swimming pools and patios, covered or uncovered with screened enclosures, shall not be included in computing coverage. 
Lot depth: The distance measured in a mean direction of the side lines of the lot from the midpoint of the front line to the midpoint of the opposite rear line of the lot. 
Lot frontage: The property line of a lot abutting a street or streets. 
Lot, interior: Any lot bounded on both sides by lots or greenbelts. 
Lot line: 
Front lot line: That property line which is common with the road right-of-way. In lots having frontages on two (2) or more streets, the front lot line shall be considered to be that lot line facing the street with the least frontage. 
Rear lot line: That property line or, on waterfront property, that bulkhead line or shoreline most nearly opposite the front lot line and generally running parallel thereto. 
Side lot line: Any property line or, on waterfront property, that bulkhead line or shoreline other than the front or rear line. On lots abutting two (2) or more streets in residential zones property lines other than street frontage shall be considered as interior side lines in applying setback requirements. 
Lot of record: A lot whose existence, location and dimensions have been legally registered or recorded in a deed or on a plat. 
Lot width: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth at the midpoint of the depth. 
Manufactured building: See "Building, conventional." 
Manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors. (Note: The term "manufacturing" covers all mechanical or chemical transformations, whether the new product is finished or semifinished as raw material in some other process. Manufacturing production usually is carried on for the wholesale market rather than for direct sales. Processing on farms is not classified as manufacturing if the raw material is grown on the farm. The manufacturing is accessory to the major use of farming.) 
Marina, industrial: A marine-oriented establishment engaged in the construction, manufacture, sale, maintenance, repair, docking and storage of commercial boats, barges, watercraft and accessories, to include engines, motors, winches, mechanical equipment, supplies, the sale of fuel, lubricants and provisions; and the receiving, processing, storage and distribution of seafood products; and living aboard as provided in this chapter. 
Marina, resort: A sheltered water or harbor area with docking facilities for sports and pleasure boats and, upon such approval as may be required, docking facilities for living aboard. Accessory uses may also include the sale of fuel and lubricants, provisions, bait and tackle; service buildings with laundry facilities, showers, toilets, lavatories and recreational facilities may be included. 
Marina, sports: A commercial establishment engaged in the sale, maintenance, repair, docking and storage, wet or dry, of boats and watercraft used for pleasure or sports purposes, and accessories, including motors, trailers, equipment and supplies. The sale of fuel and lubricants, provisions, bait and tackle shall be permitted, and upon such approval as may be required, docking facilities for living aboard. 
Market, outdoor: A market held in an open or roofed area (not within a building) where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
Marquee and canopy: Any shelter, cover or protection extending beyond the outer face of the building wall, of either rigid or nonrigid construction, designed and intended to be used for the shelter or protection of entrances and doorways. 
Massage parlor: A shop, establishment or place of business wherein is administered treatments with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body slenderizing, body reducing or body contouring, or all or any one (1) or more of the following subjects and methods of treatment, viz: Oil rubs, salt glows, hot or cold packs, all kinds of baths including steam rooms, cabinet baths, sitz baths, irrigations, body massage, either by hand or by any mechanical or electrical apparatus or device excluding fever therapy, the application of such movements as stroking, friction, rolling, vibration, kneading, cupping, pettrasage, rubbing, effleurage, or tapotement; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to the bona fide practice of the profession or business of persons authorized by the laws of the state to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, neuropathy or chiropody, or persons holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the state, nor to registered nurses or barbers or beauticians duly licensed under the laws of the state, nor to licensed practical nurses, orderlies or attendants, nor to nurse's aides in hospitals acting under the direction of a licensed physician, nor to masseurs practicing in a bona fide gymnasium facility nor to masseurs acting as trainers for a bona fide athletic team. 
Mean high-water line: Including the term "apparent mean high-water mark," shall be deemed to be the existing bulkhead line on waterfront property having such line, or the line established by a certified survey provided to the zoning official by a registered Florida land surveyor; provided that, in the event such certified survey is shown to be widely at variance with the actual high-water line on the subject property, the zoning official may require the property owner seeking the benefit of determination of mean high-water line to provide an additional certified survey as described above. 
Mini-warehouse: A structure containing separate storage of varying sizes, available to the general public at a fee for the dead storage of furniture and other household goods, or commercial or private goods. 
Mobile home: See "Dwelling unit, types." 
Mobile home park: A lot or parcel of land under single ownership or management upon which is operated a business engaged in providing for the parking of mobile homes to be used for living and storage purposes, and including the customary accessory uses such as owner's and manager's living quarters, restrooms, laundry facilities, utility areas and facilities for parks and recreation. 
Mobile home site: A lot or parcel of ground within a mobile home park, designated for the accommodation of not more than one (1) mobile home. 
Mobile home subdivision: A subdivision in which mobile homes are parked for nontransient living or sleeping purposes and in which lots are set aside or offered for sale as mobile home sites in accordance with the county subdivision regulations, including any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes on such premises. 
Model residential unit: A residential structure used for demonstration and sales purposes, not occupied as a dwelling unit, and open to the public for inspection. 
Motor home: Includes the terms "motor coach" and "sport coach" and is any vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. 
Motor home: Includes the terms "motor coach" and "sport coach" and is any vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. See "Recreational vehicle." 
Multifamily: See "Dwelling unit, types-multiple family building." 
Nightclub: A restaurant, dining room, bar or other similar establishment providing food or refreshments wherein floor shows or other forms of entertainment are provided for customers as a part of the commercial enterprise. 
Noncommercial boat docks: A boat dock or pier for which no compensation is made to utilize the dock or pier; for use only by the property owner and their guests. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot conforming when created, which, because it was created prior to the adoption of zoning regulations in the county, on September 25, 1962, or which, because of a change in regulations subsequent to its creation, does not meet the minimum development standards or other requirements of these regulations for use as a building site for the zoning district in which such lot is located. 
Nonconforming structure: Any structure lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or which, because of a change in regulations subsequent to its creation, does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use of land: The use of any land other than a use specifically permitted in the district in which the lot or parcel is located, and which use was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or any amendment thereto or to this chapter. 
Nonconforming use of structure: The use of any structure other than a use specifically permitted in the district in which the structure is located, and which use was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or any amendment thereto or to this chapter. 
Nursery, plant: The use of land and buildings for the purpose of growing for sale or selling various ornamental plants, grasses, shrubs, flowers, and horticultural specialties, and including the sale of landscaping accessories such as statuary, fertilizer, tools and similar commodities as accessory to the propagation and growth of plants. 
Nursing home: Any institutional-type operation designed to provide full-or part-time supervision and assistance to those persons not able to care for themselves, to include convalescent homes, homes for the aged, rest homes and similar facilities, but excluding homes for the mentally ill, hospitals, clinics and institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick and injured. 
Occupancy, change of: The discontinuance of use by a prior occupant, with or without a change in ownership, and the inception of the same or a different use by a new occupant. A change in the form of business organization of an occupant shall not be deemed a change of occupancy. 
Office park: A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
Open space: That land area unencumbered by an impervious surface which may include waterways and vegetation areas. 
Outparcel: A parcel divided from an original (parent) development tract, defined by metes and bounds or by a subdivision plat depicting it as an undivided tract, and intended for conveyance or conveyed to a party (developer), subsequent to the original developer or withheld by the developer for development separately from the majority of the original development tract. 
Package plant: Small, self-contained sewage treatment facilities built to serve developed areas beyond the service area of sanitary sewers. 
Package store: A place where alcoholic beverages are sold in containers for consumption off the premises. Package stores shall not include a place where only beer or wine or both are sold for consumption off the premises. 
Pain management clinic: Any publicly or privately owned clinic, facility, or office, whatever its title, including, but not limited to, a "wellness center," "urgent care facility," or "detox center," which engages in pain management. This definition includes the following: 
(1)  A pain management clinic must have at least one (1) of the following characteristics: 
a.  It employs one (1) or more persons who, in a single day, issue more than twenty (20) prescriptions of a controlled substance for the treatment of pain, whether acute pain or chronic pain; 
b.  It holds itself out through advertising as being in business to prescribe or dispense a controlled substance for the treatment of pain, whether acute pain or chronic pain; 
c.  It holds itself out through advertising as being in business to provide services for the treatment of pain, wherein the services are accompanied with prescription of or dispensing of a controlled substance for the treatment of pain, whether acute pain or chronic pain; or 
d.  It meets the definition of pain management clinic in F.S. section 458.3265, as may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  A pain management clinic does not include any privately owned clinic, medical facility or office which has at least one (1) of the following characteristics: 
a.  The majority of the physicians who provide services in the clinic, facility, or office primarily provide surgical services (excluding interventional pain management procedures that are invoiced or coded as surgical procedures); 
b.  It is licensed as a facility pursuant to F.S. ch. 395 (hospitals, etc.); 
c.  It is owned by a public held corporation whose shares are traded on a national exchange or on the over-the-counter market and whose total assets at the end of the corporation's most recent fiscal quarter exceed fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00); 
d.  It is affiliated with an accredited medical school at which training is provided for medical students, residents, or fellows; 
e.  It does not prescribe or dispense controlled substances for the treatment of pain, whether acute pain or chronic pain; or 
f.  It is owned by a corporate entity exempt from federal taxation under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3). 
Parapet: The extrusion of the main walls or a building above the roof level. Parapet walls often are used to shield mechanical equipment and vents. 
Parcel: A lot or tract of land. 
Park, public: A tract of land owned by a governmental entity that is used by the public for active and passive recreation, and related events. Public park uses shall be subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the government entity which owns the public park. 
Park, not-for profit: A park facility operated by a nonprofit organization (such as a homeowners or condominium association) which is open only to invitees of the not-for-profit park's owner. Commercially operated parks are not included in this definition. 
Park trailer: See "Recreational vehicle." 
Parking lot: An improved area of land used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking space, off-street: A permanently designated space off the public right-of-way for the off-street parking or storage of vehicles. 
Patio houses: Single-family dwellings on individual lots providing for a side yard or patio of greater than normal width on one side of the dwelling and no yard or a greatly reduced yard on the other, also known as zero lot line housing. 
Pavement: Asphalt, concrete, paver block, turf block or brick placed on the surface of the land. 
Personal services: A use in which a service is performed to or on a person, such as beauty parlors, shops or salons, barbershops, reducing or slenderizing studios, steam or turkish baths, poodle parlors or animal grooming shops. 
Pervious surface: A surface which is not resistant to the infiltration of water. 
Pharmacy: This term is defined by F.S. ch. 465. A pharmacy is considered a retail sales and service use. 
Planned development: A zoning district wherein all uses and development standards are subject to an approval pursuant to the requirements of this chapter based on a unified plan of development. 
Planning official: The director of the county planning department. 
Plat: A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. A map of a subdivision or site plan. 
Premises: Any lot, parcel, plot or tract of land, together with any buildings or structures thereon. 
Professional services: The conduct of business in any of the following or related categories: Law, architecture, planning, engineering, medicine, dentistry, osteopathy, chiropractic medicine, opticians or consulting in these or related fields; veterinarians with no outdoor kennels or runs; and similar professional activities. 
Public dance hall: An establishment maintained solely for promiscuous and public dancing, the rules for admission to which are not based upon personal selection or invitation. This definition shall not include the establishments operating under alcoholic beverage commission license or establishments operated by bona fide nonprofit, educational, charitable or religious organizations. 
Public gaming room: An establishment maintained for the purpose of providing the public, for a fee or other remuneration, with a place to engage in or play games of cards, keno, roulette, faro or other games of chance. This definition shall not include establishments maintained by bona fide nonprofit, charitable, educational or religious organizations. 
Public hearing: A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, with the public given an opportunity to talk and participate. 
Public park: Any park, playground, beach, parkway, or other recreation areas and open space, in which the county, state or federal government has an interest. 
Public use: The use of any land, water or building by a public body or for a public service or purpose. 
Recreation and entertainment: Any activity or use designed for the active or passive relaxation, enjoyment or leisure of participants or spectators. 
Recreation center: Buildings or facilities owned or operated by a condominium or homeowners association, for a social or recreation purpose, but not for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Recreational facilities: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual recreational activities. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle; also includes the terms "travel trailer," "camping trailer," "truck camper," "motor home" and "park trailer" also know as "park model." As defined below, the basic entities are: 
(1)  The "travel trailer," including fifth-wheel travel trailers, which is a vehicular portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motorized vehicle. It is primarily designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. It has a body width of no more than eight and one-half (8½) feet and an overall body length of no more than forty (40) feet when factory-equipped for the road. 
(2)  The "camping trailer," which is a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold at the campsite to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(3)  The "truck-camper," which is a truck equipped with a portable unit designed to be loaded unto, or affixed to, the bed or chassis of the truck and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use. 
(4)  The "motor home" includes the terms "motor coach" and "sport coach" and is any vehicular unit built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use. 
(5)  The "park trailer," which is a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding twelve (12) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal and temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. The total area of the unit in a setup mode, when measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls at the level of maximum dimensions and including any bay window that extends to the floor line, does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet. The length of a park trailer means the distance from the exterior of the front of the body (nearest to the drawbar and coupling mechanism) to the exterior of the rear of the body (at the opposite end of the body), including any protrusions. For purposes of this chapter, the terms "park trailer," "park model" and "park model trailers" are synonymous. 
Recreational vehicle park: A lot or parcel of land under single or common ownership or management upon which is operated a business engaged in providing for the parking of recreational vehicles to be used for temporary living quarters including the customary accessory uses such as the owner's and/or manager's living quarters, restrooms, laundry facilities, utility areas and facilities for parks and recreation. 
Recycling: The recovery of useful materials from the waste stream and reintroduction of such materials into the production stream via a three-stage process consisting of 1.) the collecting and reclaiming of materials; 2.) processing of the reclaimed materials; and 3.) the manufacturing of products using reclaimed and processed materials. 
Repair of structure: The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance. 
Residential hotel: See "Rooming and boarding house." 
Restaurant: An establishment where meals or prepared foods, including nonalcoholic and alcoholic beverages and confections, are served to customers. 
Retail sales and services: Those business activities customarily providing retail conveniences or goods, such as department stores, variety stores, drug and sundry stores, bakeries, restaurants, groceries and markets, gift shops, wearing apparel shops, home and auto supply hardware stores, furniture and stationary stores, shoe repair shops, radio and television sales and service shops, floor covering shops, sporting goods shops, florists, jewelers, music and piano sales and service, art shops, pawnshops, electrical and lighting fixture shops, pet shops and similar uses. For the purpose of this chapter, cocktail lounges and nightclubs are not included in the definition of "retail sales and services." 
Right-of-way line: The line which bounds a right-of-way at its outermost edge. "Right-of-way line" is typically synonymous with "property line." 
Road: Any public or private thoroughfare set aside for travel, excluding alleys, as defined in this section. the word "road" shall also include the words "streets," "avenue," "lane," "boulevard," "thoroughfare" and "highway" for such purposes. 
Rooming and boarding house: A residential building used or intended to be used as a place where sleeping and housekeeping accommodations are furnished or provided for pay to transient or permanent guests or tenants, which may maintain a public dining room in the same building, serving only residents and regular boarders by the week or month. 
Sanitary landfill: A site for solid waste disposal. 
Scale: The relationship between distances on a map and actual ground distance. 
School: A public or private facility devoted to primary, secondary or advanced education. 
Seawall: A wall or embankment that acts as a breakwater and is used to prevent erosion. 
Servants' quarters: Dwelling units for domestic servants employed on the premises, either within the principal building or in an accessory building. 
Setback: See "Yard, minimum." 
Sexually oriented business means: 
(1)  An adult arcade, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult dancing establishment, adult photographic or modeling studio, adult theater, and establishments operated for commercial gain where an employee, operator, or owner exposes his or her specified anatomical areas for viewing by patrons, including massage establishments, whether or not licensed pursuant to chapter 480, Florida Statutes, tanning salons, and establishments whose primary business stock in trade is dependent upon the activities relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Excluded from this definition are educational institutions where the exposure of specified anatomical areas is associated with a curriculum or program. For the purposes of this section, an educational institution means the site or premises upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes, courses of study, or both, required for accreditation by or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. The term educational institution includes libraries, art galleries and museums open to the public. 
(3)  An establishment that possesses a sexually oriented business license is presumed to be a sexually oriented business. 
Shopping center: A grouping of consumer-oriented commercial establishments, planned and developed as a single structure or under a unified architectural theme, owned and managed as a unit; and providing a range of goods and services specific to a definable market area; and providing customer and employee parking off-street and on-site. 
Shoreline: A straight or smoothly curved line which, on tidal waters, follows the general configuration of the mean high-water line; and which, on nontidal waters, is determined by the annual average waterline. Boat slips and other manmade or minor indentations shall be construed as lying landward of the shoreline and are considered upland when computing the lot area of waterfront property. 
SIC code: A two-, three-or four-digit numeric code that identifies commercial or industrial activities and classifies firms according to standards set down in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972 (Washington: GPO 1972). 
Sign: Any outdoor advertising display using letters, words, figures, pictures, designs or combinations thereof or symbols to attract the attention of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation or any merchandise or service whatsoever. 
Site plan: The development plan for one (1) or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including: topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, waterways, open spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices, and any other information that reasonable may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority. 
Slip: The waterway existing for the reception of one (1) boat for mooring. 
Special exception, special approval and special use: A use that would not be permissible generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, relation to the neighborhood and to such other restrictions as may be deemed appropriate in each case, would not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely or opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals or pubic region; 
b.  Cleavage of the nates of the human buttocks; 
c.  That portion of the human female breast directly or laterally below a point immediately above the top of the areola; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed. 
(2)  Human genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(3)  Any covering, tape, pastie, latex spray or paint or other device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any of the specified anatomical areas listed in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
Specified sexual activity means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(2)  Sexual conduct as defined in chapter 847, Florida Statutes; 
(3)  Sexual battery as defined in chapter 847, Florida Statutes. 
Storage: The safekeeping of any goods, wares, products or other commodities for later use or disposal. This term shall not include animals, nor shall it apply to customary and usual activities accessory to agricultural or residential dwellings. 
Storage, dead: The storage of goods, wares, products or other commodities, with no sales, conferences, or other human activity other than the placement, removal and/or sorting of stored items. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor or average grade, finished, open or enclosed, and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above and having a minimum ceiling height of seven (7) feet or more. 
Structure: Any construction or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. "Structure" includes "building," as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground or requiring construction or erection on the ground.] [3] 
Towers, communication: Any structure fifty (50) feet or greater in height, erected and so designed to receive or transmit electronic waves, such as telephone, television, radio or microwave transmissions. 
Townhouse: See "Dwelling unit, types." 
Transient: A person present in the county but having no fixed place of residence therein. 
Travel trailer: See "Recreational vehicle." 
Truck camper: See "Recreational vehicle." 
Truck stop: An establishment where the principal use is the refueling and servicing of trucks and tractor-trailer rigs. Such establishments may have restaurants or snack bars and sleeping accommodations for the drivers of such over-the-road equipment and may provide facilities for the repair and maintenance of such equipment. 
Undue hardship: An exceptional hardship which cannot reasonably be corrected or avoided by the applicant. Self-created problems are not undue hardship nor are common difficulties shared by all other property owners in an area. 
Unified control: The unrestricted right of any owner or agent or enforce whatever conditions are set on the use and development of a parcel of land through the provisions of these regulations, by binding his heirs, assigns or other successors in title with covenants or restrictions on the development and subsequent use of the property. 
Use: Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of land. 
Use, accessory. A use of a structure or premises which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the structure or premises. (see "Use, principal"). 
Use, mixed: The development of land or building or structure with two (2) or more different but compatible uses, such as but not limited to residential, office, industrial and technological, retail, commercial, public, entertainment, or recreation, in a compact urban form. 
Use permitted by right: A use or uses which, by their very nature, are allowed within the specific zoning district provided all applicable regulations of the county are met. "Permitted uses" includes the principal use of the land or structure as well as accessory uses unless specifically stated to the contrary. 
Use, principal: The primary purpose for which land or a structure or building is used. 
Use, temporary: A use or activity which is permitted only for a limited time, and subject to specific regulations and permitted procedures. 
Used or occupied: Includes "intended," "designed" or "arranged to be used or occupied." 
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of the zoning regulations with regard to dimensional requirements including but not limited to the height, area or size of structures or size of yards, buffers and open spaces. 
Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, operated primarily for a specific commercial establishment or group of establishments in a particular industry or economic field, not generally accessible to the public. 
Warehouse, mini: See "mini-warehouse." 
Waterfront: Property which physically abuts any body of water, including creeks, canals, rivers, lakes or any other body of water, natural or artificial. 
Wholesale trade: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. (Note: Lumber, plywood and millwork yards such as building materials establishments are generally classified as wholesale unless the primary operation is directly to the general public as opposed to builders. In such case, they are classified as retail operations). 
Yard, front: The lot line of a lot abutting a public street shall be deemed the front lot line. The front yard of a corner lot shall be that yard abutting the street with the least frontage. 
Yard, minimum: The minimum horizontal distance between the street, rear or side lot lines and the front, rear or side lines of the building; when two (2) or more lots under one (1) ownership are used for a single permitted principal use, the exterior property lines of the lots so grouped shall be used in determining setbacks. In determining setback requirements for all residential districts, roof overhangs, chimneys, awnings, air conditioner apparatus, balcony projections, open stairways, canopies, pilasters, decoration, etc., projection three (3) feet or less into required yards shall not constitute the building line. Buildings of two (2) stories or more, where permitted, may be "stepped" provided that the setback for each story of the building meets the minimum setback required for its height as specified in the lot and building requirements of the zoning district in which the building is located. 
Yard, rear: That yard most nearly opposite the front yard as defined in this section, except that corner lots shall be considered to have only front and side yards. 
Yard, side: Any yard other than a front yard or rear yard. 
Zoning: The dividing of the county into districts and the establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning district: An area assigned a specified classification of uses and structures pursuant to this chapter. 
Zoning official: The person duly authorized by the board of county commissioners and delegated the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the county's zoning regulations. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 13; Res. No. 85-286, § 1, 10-15-85; Res. No. 85-315, § 1, 11-19-85; Res. No. 87-78, § 3, 5-19-87; Res. No. 87-254, §§ 13, 14, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 88-40, § 1, 10-25-88; Ord. No. 89-51, § 1, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 91-55, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 1-28-92; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 94-53, §§ 1, 2, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 99-037, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-99; Ord. No. 2002-010, § 5, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 2003-061, § 1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2011-030, § 1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2011-030, § 1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2017-053, § 1(Exh. A), 11-28-17; Ord. No. 2023-016, § 1(Exh. A), 3-28-23) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— In its complete revision of this section, § 1 of Ord. No. 89-51, adopted June 22, 1989, failed to include this definition; but neither did it specifically delete the definition through the use of struck-through type. 
 --- (3) --- 
Editor's note— In its complete revision of § 3-9-2, Ord. No. 89-51 did not include the definition of "structure," but neither did it specifically delete the term through the use of struck-through type. 

Sec. 3-9-3. - Violations. 
Whenever violations of this chapter are observed by or reported to the zoning official, he shall promptly investigate. If such violation exists, the zoning official shall immediately notify the offending party in writing or by posting a violation or if construction, shall post a stop-work order at the site in violation. If written notification fails to result in compliance within a reasonable time, the zoning official shall request legal counsel to take appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 89-49, § 1, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-9-4. - Intent and purpose. 
The regulations in this chapter shall be effective within the unincorporated area of the county and are enacted to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the people, and to regulate the height and size of buildings and structures and the use of land for commercial, industrial, residential and other uses, and to properly implement the comprehensive plan. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 2) 
Sec. 3-9-5. - Administration and enforcement; building permits. 
(a)  Administration. 
(1)  Planning and zoning board. The planning and zoning board shall consist of a total of six (6) members. Five (5) members of the planning and zoning board shall be voting members, consisting of one (1) qualified voter from each county commissioner's district. One (1) member of the planning and zoning board shall be a nonvoting member nominated by the School Board of Charlotte County whose duties shall be to attend any of those meetings of the planning and zoning board when, while acting in its capacity as the local planning agency, the planning and zoning board hears an application for a comprehensive plan amendment or rezoning which, if approved, would increase residential density on the subject property. All appointments to the planning and zoning board shall be made by the board of county commissioners. Members shall serve for four (4) years from the date of appointment but shall be subject to removal at any time by majority vote of the board of county commissioners (BCC). The filling of any vacancy occurring in any office shall be for only the remainder of that term. The manner of appointment, or removal and filling of board vacancies shall be by majority vote of the BCC. One (1) member of the planning and zoning board actively serves on the affordable housing advisory committee per section 1-8-64. Creation of the affordable housing advisory committee. 
Members of the planning and zoning board shall receive no salaries or other compensation for their services as members, but they shall be entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
The planning and zoning board shall elect from its membership a chairman and a vice chairman and such other officers as the board may deem necessary or proper. Officers of the planning and zoning board shall serve for one (1) year, but shall be eligible for reelection. 
(2)  Procedure. The BCC may adopt rules of procedure for the transaction of business by the planning and zoning board. The planning and zoning board shall maintain a public record of all transactions and hearings. The planning and zoning board shall hold regular meetings at least once each calendar month. 
(3)  Planning. In addition to any other duties granted to it, the planning and zoning board shall act as the county's local planning agency, as that term is defined in F.S. § 163.3174. The planning and zoning board shall acquire and maintain such information and material as shall be necessary for an understanding and evaluation of past trends, present conditions and probable future developments and trends within the county. It shall advise and inform the board of county commissioners and the general public in all matters relating to zoning, planning and future development. It shall conduct such public hearings and make such investigations as may be required in the performance of its duties. Amendments and alterations in the zoning regulations and district boundaries may be proposed by the board of county commissioners, by the planning and zoning board, by the local planning agency as that term is defined by general law or by a petition of the owners of the lands to be affected by the proposed amendments or regulations. Upon due notice and hearing, the planning and zoning board shall submit its recommendations to the BCC regarding the proposed amendment, which recommendation shall be acted upon as provided by law. 
State Law reference— Local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3174. 
(4)  Zoning. The zoning official or his duly authorized representative shall be the executive officer in charge of the administration and enforcement of all zoning regulations established within the unincorporated areas of the county. The zoning official shall be appointed by and hold office at the pleasure of the board of county commissioners. The zoning official shall: 
a.  Attend all meetings of the planning and zoning board and the board of zoning appeals; 
b.  Administer and enforce this chapter; 
c.  Receive and review all plans and specifications for proposed structures to ensure compliance with zoning regulations, and cause to be made periodic inspections of structures under construction to ensure compliance with approved plans and specifications; 
d.  Receive petitions for requests for special exceptions, petitions for variances and appeals from administrative rulings on zoning matters; 
e.  Issue public notices as required by the board of zoning appeals and the board of county commissioners; 
f.  Receive fees for permits, prepare budgets for operations of the zoning department, and to recommend the hiring of the personnel necessary for the expeditious performance of the duties assigned to this office, subject to approval by the board of county commissioners; and 
g.  Perform such other duties as may be established by the BCC. 
(b)  Application. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, move, add onto, remove or demolish any building or structure on land or water, without first making application for a permit to the zoning official in such form as he may require and obtaining the proper permit. No existing use, new use or change of use in land or water of any building or structure or any part thereof shall be made except in conformance with this chapter. 
(c)  Building permits. In addition to other requirements of this chapter or other regulations, an application for a building permit shall contain each of the following: 
(1)  Prints or drawings of an appropriate scale of the structures to be built; 
(2)  Site plan requirements: 
a.  For any development which will increase the footprint or square footage of the structure, or which will require additional parking, a signed and sealed site plan, to scale, showing the location of the structure and all appurtenances thereto on the property; distances to the property lines, bodies of water, or other buildings or structures; and off-street parking spaces showing access and maneuvering space. 
b.  For any development which will not increase the footprint or square footage of the structure, a site plan, to scale, showing the location of the structure and all appurtenances thereto on the property; distances to the property lines, bodies of water, or other buildings or structures; and off-street parking spaces showing access and maneuvering space. 
(3)  A signed and sealed survey showing all recorded easements and the apparent mean high-water line shall be submitted with applications for new construction; 
(4)  Where the existing or to be constructed building will be devoted to more than one (1) use, such plans shall show the percentage and areas of each use with the details thereof; 
(5)  A legal description of the lot upon which such structures are to be constructed; and 
(6)  A plan for screening of commercial and/or industrial property. 
The application shall be made by the owner or his authorized agent. No building permit shall be issued without certification by the zoning official that the plans submitted conform to this chapter. It shall be the duty of the zoning official, upon receiving applications for permits, to examine the same within a reasonable period of time after filing, not to exceed thirty (30) days. If the zoning official finds that the proposed work will be in compliance with this chapter, he shall approve the application. If he finds that the proposed work is not in compliance with the regulations herein, he shall reject such application, noting his findings in a report to be attached to the application and delivering a copy to the applicant. 
(d)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Generally. The zoning official shall approve the issuance of a certificate of occupancy after he has determined that the building has been constructed and screening installed in accordance with the provisions of the permit and that such building is designed, arranged and appears to be intended for use as specified in the building permit. No building shall be occupied or used until such permit is approved by the zoning official. 
(2)  Change of principal use. Whenever the principal use of an existing structure is to be changed, the owner, agent, lessee or intended occupant thereof shall apply to the zoning official for issuance of a new certificate of occupancy, stating that the new use is approved within the district wherein it is located. A new certificate of occupancy shall only be approved by the zoning official when the new use conforms to this chapter. 
(e)  Authority to revoke permit. The county commission may revoke any permit issued where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit was based or any permit issued in contravention of law. 
(f)  Fees. The BCC shall by resolution fix reasonable recording, hearing and permit fees to be charged by the zoning official. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 9; Res. No. 83-07, § 1(9.5.1—9.5.6), 2-8-83; Res. No. 85-112, § 3, 6-18-85; Ord. No. 89-49, § 2, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 2003-076, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-03; Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.1. - Authority to enter upon private property. 
The zoning official, members of county staff, contractors and agents acting under proper county authority, may enter upon land to make examinations and surveys as are necessary for the performance of their duties under these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.2. - Deed restrictions. 
No public agencies shall be responsible for enforcing deed restrictions or restrictive covenants. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.3. - Exceptions to required yards. 
In all districts, yards shall be as established by the applicable district regulations except as follows: 
(1)  When lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a street between intersecting streets have been developed with the principal buildings having an average front yard with a variance of not more than six (6) feet from the required front yard, the zoning official may approve the issuance of a building permit to provide for a front yard of not less than the average established. 
(2)  Where single-family residential lots of record are nonconforming because of width, the minimum side yards shall not be less than ten (10) percent of the lot width, provided that no side yard shall be less than five (5) feet wide. 
(3)  If a multifamily, commercial or industrial district abuts a single-family district, no structure shall be erected closer to the abutting single-family zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
(4)  Every part of required yards shall be open and unobstructed, subject to the following: 
a.  Sills and belt courses may project not over twelve (12) inches into a required yard. 
b.  Movable awnings may project not over three (3) feet into a required yard, provided that where the yard is less than five (5) feet in width the projection shall not exceed one-half (½) the width of the yard. 
c.  Window- or wall-mounted air conditioning units, chimneys, fireplaces, bay windows or pilasters may project not over three (3) feet into a required yard. 
d.  Fire escapes, stairways and balconies which are unroofed and unenclosed may not project more than five (5) feet in a required yard. 
e.  Hoods, cornices, gutters, roof overhangs, air conditioning units and marquees may project not more than five (5) feet into a required yard, but in no event closer than one (1) foot to the lot line. 
f.  Fences, walls and hedges are permitted in required yards, subject to the provisions of section 3-9-72 on fences and walls, and section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections. 
g.  Except as provided by section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections, nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit landscaping or gardening on any lot. 
h.  No structures other than those approved by the county engineer may be located in or project into a drainage easement of record. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.4. - Expedited permitting process for certified affordable housing development. 
(a)  General purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide an expedited permitting process for the construction of affordable housing in accordance with the Charlotte County Affordable Housing Incentive Plan, adopted March 29, 1994, pursuant to the State Housing Initiatives Partnership (SHIP) program, F.S. § 420.9072. The expedited permitting process for affordable housing development ("AHD") contains incentives available to developers of a certified AHD. A review process for the approval of AHDs is included in this section, as well as appropriate references to other county ordinances or regulations affecting the development of AHDs. The review committee for the expedited permitting process will be composed of representatives from the community development department, public works, fire rescue/EMS, fire prevention, Charlotte County Utilities, and any other department(s) designated by the county administrator. (Reference to the county administrator throughout this section shall be construed to include his/her designee(s)). 
(b)  Authorization of affordable housing developments (AHDs). The county administrator is authorized to certify that an application is, or qualifies as, an affordable housing development (AHD) when a developer commits to make at least twenty-five (25) percent of the units (or one (1) unit, in the case of a single unit development) to be constructed or rehabilitated affordable and available to low or very low income persons as provided in Ordinance No. 93-07. 
(c)  Rapid response processing. The county administrator shall serve as the ombudsman between the applicant and the Charlotte County review agencies. The ombudsman shall coordinate an expedited review process that gives AHDs priority in the review of zoning and building permit applications. 
(1)  The ombudsman shall assist the developer of an AHD and the development team in the permit requirements for county AHD applications. AHD proposals that exceed the thresholds of site plan review process outlined in section 3-9-7. The site plan review shall schedule a meeting to review AHD applications within one (1) week of the receipt of a complete application. AHD projects that require action by the board of zoning appeals shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting, unless the applicant requests a delay. 
(2)  A certified AHD application that does not require either the site plan review or board of zoning appeals approval shall be expedited through the Charlotte County Building Department review process. All Charlotte County review agencies shall give priority review to all AHD applications, reporting items that may result in delay of approval to the ombudsman. The ombudsman shall review any item that may result in a delay with the applicant within twenty-four (24) hours of the action necessary to facilitate application approval. 
(3)  Any proposed amendment, deviation, or change to an AHD application that has been approved by the site plan review shall be reviewed by the zoning official to determine whether the proposed change constitutes a minor or major modification to the approved AHD site plan. The ombudsman is responsible to provide any proposed revision to an approved AHD site plan with the same expedited processing given to the original application for permit approval. 
(d)  Review of regulations and procedures that affect housing cost. Any and all changes in code, procedure or process that affect the cost of housing shall be reviewed by the Charlotte County Affordable Housing Advisory Committee. No such changes shall be considered for approval by the Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners, or any person or agency delegated with authority to act on its behalf, unless it has been considered by the affordable housing advisory committee at a public meeting. The Charlotte County Affordable Housing Advisory Committee shall make nonbinding recommendations of any proposed changes in code, procedure or process that affect the cost of housing to the Charlotte County Board of County Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.5. - Exclusions from height limitations. 
Height limitations contained in article II, district regulations, and section 3-9-88, waterfront property, do not apply to elevator shafts, spires, belfries, cupolas, flagpoles, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, feed storage structures and other appurtenances usually located above roof level and not intended for human occupancy, nor to fire towers or airport control towers. The height of such structures shall not exceed limitations prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or section 3-9-63, air hazard zones. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.6. - Form of ownership. 
This chapter shall be construed and applied with regard to the use of property and without regard to the form of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.7. - Moving of structures. 
No structure shall be moved from one (1) lot to another lot or moved to another location on the same lot unless such structure shall thereafter conform to this chapter and all other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-5.8. - Property frontage. 
No permit shall be issued for the erection of a building on a parcel of land or lot which does not abut a public or private road right-of-way for at least fifty (50) feet, except that a minimum road abutment of twenty (20) feet shall apply to properties, including flag lots, if there is sufficient building envelope within the property to meet all minimum building setbacks and lot area requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-6. - Board of zoning appeals (BZA) powers, duties and procedures. 
(a)  Creation and appointment of the board of zoning appeals. As part of the zoning organization and implementation of the land development regulations, the board of county commissioners, also referred to as the BCC, has created a board of zoning appeals, also referred to as the BZA. The BZA shall have five (5) members, appointed by the BCC, one (1) of whom shall be appointed from each of the five (5) county commission districts. No member of the BZA shall be an elected official of Charlotte County. No less than one (1), nor more than two (2), member(s) of the BZA shall also be a member of the planning and zoning board. To provide for BZA continuity of membership through staggered terms, the terms of members appointed from commission districts 1, 3, and 5 shall expire on the fourth Tuesday of November, 2016. Members appointed from commission districts 2 and 4 shall be deemed to have been appointed to terms expiring on the fourth Tuesday of November, 2014. Thereafter, all terms shall run for a term of four (4) years, and the filling of any vacancy occurring in any office shall be for only the remainder of that term. The manner of appointment, or removal and filling of board vacancies shall be by majority vote of the BCC. 
(b)  Organization. The BZA shall elect from its membership a chair, vice-chair, and secretary, who shall serve a term of one (1) year and shall be eligible to succeed themselves. The BCC has adopted rules of procedure for the transaction of the business of the BZA and the zoning official shall maintain a record of all its resolutions, transactions and decisions on all matters. All transactions and decisions shall be a public record and available for public inspection. 
(c)  Procedures. The chair, or in their absence, the vice-chair or secretary, shall chair meetings, and compel the attendance of witnesses. All testimony given shall be under oath. All decisions regarding appeals, the issuance of a special exception or variance by the BZA shall be quasi-judicial in nature. All meetings of the BZA shall be open to the public. The zoning official shall keep minutes of BZA meetings, showing the vote of each member on each question, and indicating, also, the absence of any member, or legal abstention from voting. The results of all of the official actions of the BZA shall become a public record in the office of the zoning official. 
(d)  Education and travel expenses. Members of the BZA shall receive no salaries or other compensation for their services as such members. However; if they choose, members of the BZA may be reimbursed for expenses, including but not limited to training, education, and mileage driven, according to county policy. 
(e)  Expenses and fees. 
(1)  The cost and expenses of operation of the BZA shall be budgeted and paid in the same manner as provided for the planning and zoning board and shall be a part of the budget adopted for such board. 
(2)  The BCC is authorized, empowered, and directed to establish by resolution a schedule of reasonable fees to be charged by the BZA and all such sums received shall be deposited in the general fund of Charlotte County. 
(f)  Authority. The BZA is designated by the BCC to hear, and have final authority on, the following applications. 
(1)  Hear and decide administrative appeals when it is asserted there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning official in the administration, enforcement, or interpretation of this Code. 
(2)  Special exception uses under this Code, subject to reasonable safeguards, in particular circumstances. 
(3)  Grant time extensions and variances from the dimensional requirements of these land development regulations shall not be contrary to the public interest where, in specific cases and owing to special circumstances, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the regulations will result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(4)  The BZA shall not issue or grant variances or special exceptions which will permit a land use in a zone or district in which such use is forbidden by the land development regulations. 
(g)  Decisions of the BZA. All decisions of the BZA shall require an affirmative vote of the majority of board members present and voting on the matter, unless stated otherwise in this Code. Tie votes shall not carry the motion made. As soon as possible after the BZA has made their decision the zoning official shall mail a decision letter to the applicant documenting the decision of the BZA including their reasons for a denial or any conditions adopted as conditions of approval. The zoning official shall also create a notice of approval, which shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and made a part of the official records of Charlotte County. 
(h)  Appeal to circuit court or county commission. 
(1)  Any person or persons, corporation, or other entity aggrieved by any decision of the BZA may, within thirty (30) calendar days after such decision has been documented by the zoning official in a decision letter, but not thereafter, apply to the circuit court of the county for appropriate relief. There shall be no right to apply to the circuit court for relief on account of any order, requirement, decision, determination or action of the zoning official unless there shall first have been an appeal to the BZA. It is the intention of the BCC that all administrative steps provided in this Code with regard to appeal and review shall be taken before any application may be made to the courts for relief with respect to matters or things appealable and reviewable hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2014-043, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-012, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-043, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, amended § 3-9-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-9-6, pertained to board of zoning appeals; powers and duties; procedure, and derived from Minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 10; Res. No. 85-112, § 1, adopted June 18, 1985; Res. No. 87-256, § 4, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Ord. No. 87-257, §§ 2, 3, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Ord. No. 88-39, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1988; Ord. No. 89-50, § 1, adopted June 22, 1989; Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, adopted March 27, 1990; Ord. No. 94-52, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1994. 
Sec. 3-9-6.1. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Appeals of denial by zoning official to the BZA. The BZA may, upon proper application, public notice and public hearing reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning official in the administration, enforcement or interpretation of any of these land development regulations. The BZA may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as shall be proper in the circumstances, and for such purpose shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken. 
(b)  Application. An appeal to the BZA following a denial from the zoning official shall be in writing on forms provided by the community development department, and shall be filed with the community development department within thirty (30) calendar days after the date on the decision letter notifying the applicant of the administrative decision or determination by the zoning official. The appeal shall be submitted with the applicable fee, accompanied by all documents, plans and other papers constituting the record, and specify the grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  Action by county staff. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the zoning official shall determine the date, time and place of the public hearing, and shall give published notice as well as written mailed notice by first class mail to all substantially interested parties at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. The zoning official shall transmit to the BZA all documents, plans and other papers or other records upon which the decision appealed from is based. At the public hearing of an administrative appeal the zoning official shall present the facts of the case and explain the decision made, after which any person may appear and be heard under oath. The final action by the BZA shall be documented by the zoning official in a decision letter to the applicant, copies of which shall be kept on file. The zoning official shall also create a notice of approval, which shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and made a part of the official records of Charlotte County. A copy of the recorded notice of approval shall also be mailed to the applicant. 
(d)  Action by applicant. The applicant shall appear at the public hearing in person, or by agent or attorney, to testify under oath before the BZA, present their case for the appeal, and answer questions asked of them. 
(e)  Considerations for appeals. In reaching its decision, the BZA shall consider the following criteria as well as any other issues which are pertinent and reasonable. 
(1)  Whether or not the appeal is of a nature properly brought to them for a decision, or whether or not there is an established procedure for handling the request other than through the appeal process (i.e., a variance or special exception, etc.). 
(2)  The intent of the regulation in question. 
(3)  The effect the ruling will have when applied generally to the intent of the land development regulations. 
(4)  Staff recommendations, the testimony of the appellant, and testimony of substantially interested parties shall also be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2014-043, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-6.2. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. A special exception is permission for a use that would not be permissible generally, or without restriction, throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to area, location, relation to the neighborhood and other such restrictions, as may be deemed appropriate in each case, would be compatible with surrounding land uses and found to be consistent with the comprehensive plan for Charlotte County. 
(b)  Applicability. Special exceptions are established to allow for the approval of specific uses in addition to the permitted uses in each zoning district. Uses eligible for a special exception shall be limited to: 
(1)  The uses listed as special exceptions in each zoning district. 
(2)  Adaptive reuse of an historic structure. 
(c)  Initiation. An application for a special exception may be initiated by anyone with a legal interest in the property; however, an applicant who is not the owner of subject property, shall be required to present evidence of legal authority from the owner to submit an application. 
(d)  Application requirements. Unless waived by the zoning official, a preapplication conference must take place with the zoning official at least five (5) working days prior to submitting an application. Applications for special exceptions shall be submitted on forms obtained from and filed with the zoning official. All applications shall be accompanied by additional documentation as specified in this Code or required by the zoning official and the applicable fee. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application. If additional data is required, the zoning official shall, within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application, document in writing to the applicant what specifically is required. Failure of the applicant to submit information required by the zoning official and to make the application complete or sufficient within thirty (30) calendar days of the written request shall be considered a withdrawal and the application fee shall be refunded less the administrative fee. Special exception applications shall include but not be limited to the following, as determined by the zoning official. 
(1)  A concept plan at an appropriate scale showing the existing and proposed placement of structures on the property, provisions for ingress and egress, off-street parking and loading areas, refuse and service areas and required yards and other spaces. 
(2)  Plans showing proposed locations for utilities hookups. 
(3)  Plans for screening, landscaping, and buffers, with references to type, dimensions, and character. 
(4)  Proposed signs and lighting, including type, dimension and character. 
(5)  A Legal description of the entire property encompassing the special exception. 
(6)  A narrative description of the total project in sufficient detail to provide an understanding of the nature of the development proposal and a statement describing how the requested special exception meets the approval criteria for special exceptions as set forth in this Code. 
(e)  Notice of public hearing. The county shall provide notice of the public hearing to be held before the BZA in accordance with the following provisions. 
(1)  Published notice. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application and consistency with the comprehensive plan, Code of Ordinances, and the land development regulations. Upon the receipt of a complete and valid application for a special exception, the zoning official shall establish a date, time and place for the public hearing before the BZA. Published notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of any public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The published notice shall contain a description of the proposed use; address and legal description of subject property; the date, time, and place of the public hearing or hearings, whichever is applicable; and shall invite all interested persons to appear and be heard. Failure to comply strictly with published notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(2)  Mailed notice. The owners of property located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property shall be mailed notice of the proposed special exception at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the initial public hearing on the special exception before the BZA. The mailed notice shall contain a description of the proposed use; address and legal description of subject property; the date, time and place of the public hearing or hearings, whichever is applicable; a phone number to contact the county for more information; and shall also invite all interested persons to appear and be heard. Notice by mail shall be addressed to the property owner at the address shown on the latest available Charlotte County Property Appraiser Real Property Records. Such notice shall be considered effective when placed in the United States mail, postage paid. Failure to comply strictly with mailed notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(3)  Posted notice. A sign shall be posted conspicuously on the subject property, which shall contain a description of the proposed use, date, time and place of the public hearing; and a phone number to contact the county for more information. The sign shall be placed on the property at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the initial public hearing on the special exception before the BZA. Failure to comply strictly with posted notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(f)  Action by county staff. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application and consistency with the comprehensive plan, Code of Ordinances, and the land development regulations. Should an application not be complete or sufficient or an error in the application be discovered, the zoning official shall have the discretion to require the applicant to reapply or submit revised or additional information. Upon finding the application to be correct and complete, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the next available BZA meeting. The zoning official may require that site plans associated with special exceptions be reviewed and comments provided to staff during the special exception process, although no site plan approval shall be implied by this review. The zoning official shall investigate the conditions pertaining to a particular request and submit a report to the BZA, providing the facts involved and making a recommendation based on the application submitted, the facts known prior to the public hearing, and this Code. The final action by the BZA shall be documented by the zoning official in a decision letter to the applicant, copies of which shall be kept on file. The zoning official shall also create a notice of approval, which shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and made a part of the official records of Charlotte County. The original recorded notice of approval shall be kept on file and a copy mailed to the applicant. 
(g)  Action by applicant. The applicant, agent or attorney shall appear at the public hearing or hearings in person, to testify under oath before the BZA members, present their case for the application, and answer questions asked of them. The applicant may also initiate any of the following actions. 
(1)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant or legally appointed representative may request that their application be withdrawn at any time. A request to withdraw an application shall be in writing to the zoning official unless the applicant makes their request on the record at the scheduled public hearing of the BZA. A written request shall be signed by all persons who signed the application, or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official may authorize a refund of all or part of the application fee if an application is withdrawn more than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. If a request to withdraw an application is made less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing then no part of the application fee shall be refunded. 
(2)  Postponement of scheduled public hearing. If an applicant desires to postpone a scheduled public hearing they may request that the scheduled public hearing be postponed to any one (1) of the next four (4) available public hearings. A request to postpone the scheduled public hearing must be in writing and must be received by the zoning official at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The request shall be signed by all persons who signed the application, or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official shall then remove the application from the agenda and mail a notice, at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing, to the surrounding property owners who were mailed a notice of the original public hearing, notifying them that the application will not be heard at the originally scheduled public hearing but will be heard on the date and time of the requested public hearing. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(3)  Request for continuance from the zoning official or BZA. If an applicant desires to continue a public hearing less than fifteen (15) calendar days before the scheduled meeting, they must make such a request in writing to the zoning official prior to the public hearing, or to the BZA, at the public hearing. The zoning official may, one (1) time per application, based on extraordinary circumstances, grant a continuance to any one (1) of the next four (4) available public hearings. Other than the one time grant of continuance by the zoning official. Extraordinary circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, sudden illness or medical condition, death, or discovery of a late objector with their consent. All requests to continue the public hearing may be granted or denied only by the BZA. The BZA may hold a portion of the public hearing to give those who are present a chance to testify and then continue any action on the matter. If the BZA determines that a continuance is appropriate they may continue action on any application to a date certain at one (1) of their next scheduled public hearings. If directed to do so by the BZA, as soon as practicable thereafter the zoning official shall mail a notice to the surrounding property owners notifying them that the application has been continued and will be heard on the date and time of the next scheduled public hearing. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(h)  Action by the BZA. The BZA shall hold a public hearing to obtain public input on the proposed special exception. Following the public hearing, the BZA may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed special exception. 
(1)  Should the BZA deny a special exception, the reasons for denial shall be stated and put in writing for the record. Such reasons shall be based on the approval criteria for special exceptions stated in this Code as they may be applicable to the denial. 
(2)  Should the BZA approve a special exception, the BZA may impose reasonable conditions in order to protect the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare, and prevent or minimize adverse effects on other property in the surrounding neighborhood. Any request for a modification of any BZA condition of approval for a special exception shall be processed as if it is a modification of a special exception. 
(3)  Continuance of BZA action. If the BZA determines that a continuance is appropriate, they may continue action on any application. If the BZA continues their action on any application to a date certain and directs the zoning official to mail notice of the continuance, then as soon thereafter the zoning official shall mail a notice to the surrounding property owners notifying them that the application has been continued and will be acted on again at the date and time of the next schedule public hearing and no additional noticing shall be required. If the BZA continues their action on any application without setting a date certain then the zoning official shall publish, mail, and post a notice for the next meeting at which the application will be acted upon according to the regular noticing requirements of this Code. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(i)  Approval criteria for special exceptions. In addition to the standard approval criteria for developments and uses permitted by this Code, a special exception shall be granted by the BZA only if all of the following approval criteria are satisfied. 
(1)  The proposed special exception is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The proposed special exception is compatible with existing and permitted uses surrounding the land on which the proposed special exception would exist. 
(3)  The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the proposed use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(j)  Effect of special exception approval. Should the BZA approve a special exception the use may be initiated and continued only if all of the development standards of Code and additional conditions imposed by the BZA are maintained and complied with. An approved special exception use shall be considered permanent; however, a special exception use may expire, be revoked, or no longer be an authorized use if any [of] the following circumstances are found to exist. 
(1)  Approval of a special exception, with or without conditions, shall be considered permanent to the extent that it may only be revoked following the procedure for a new special exception. Only the BZA may direct the zoning official to initiate an application to revoke an existing special exception. 
(2)  An approved special exception may have a time limit in the BZA conditions of approval for the special exception use. In which case, the special exception shall become void and the use shall be terminated and discontinued at the end of the time specified in the BZA condition, unless a time extension is granted by the BZA. 
(3)  Any violation of the conditions and safeguards that may be imposed on any special exception by the BZA, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(k)  Modifications. Minor alterations or modifications of any approved special exception may be approved by the zoning official. Any expansion or major alteration or modification of any approved special exception must be approved by the BZA as if it is a new application. It shall be the duty of the zoning official to determine which modifications are classified as major or minor. 
(l)  Time between similar applications. Whenever the BZA has denied an application for a special exception, the BZA shall not thereafter consider an identical application for a special exception concerning all or any part of the same property for a period of six (6) months from the date of such action, except that this requirement may be waived by the positive votes of a majority of the members of the BZA. This section does not apply to applications for a modification of a previously approved special exception. 
(m)  Use of historic structures. Owners of structures designated on the National Register of Historic Places, the Florida Master Site File, or the local historic register may petition the BZA for approval of a special exception use for any type of use which would serve to perpetuate the viable contemporary utilization and adaptive reuse of the historic structure, regardless of whether such use is permitted by special exception in the zoning district in which the historic structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 2014-043, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-012, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-18; Ord. No. 2020-016, § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-9-6.3. - Variances. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The variance process is intended to provide limited relief from the dimensional requirements of the land development regulations in those cases where strict application of those requirements will create a practical difficulty or undue hardship, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, and prohibiting the use of land in a manner normally allowed under the land development regulations. A variance should provide relief in limited circumstances where the requirements of the land development regulations render the land difficult to use because of some unique, exceptional, or extraordinary physical attribute of the property itself, or some other extraordinary factor of the property for which the variance is requested. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The following procedures shall be used to apply for a variance from the dimensional standards or requirements of this Code which do not qualify for an administrative variance. 
(2)  The following procedures shall also be used for an administrative variance application only if the zoning official has received a valid written objection. 
(c)  Initiation. An application for a variance may be initiated by anyone with a legal interest in the property; however, an applicant who is not the owner of subject property, shall be required to present evidence of legal authority from the owner to submit an application. 
(d)  Application requirements. Unless waived by the zoning official, a preapplication conference must take place with the zoning official at least five (5) working days prior to submitting an application. Applications for a variance shall be submitted on forms obtained from and filed with the zoning official. All applications shall state the specific section of the zoning section of these land development regulations for which relief is requested and the grounds for such relief. Applications shall be accompanied by any evidence and additional documentation as specified in this Code or required by the zoning official, and the applicable fee, to be established by resolution of the BCC. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application. If additional data is required, the zoning official shall, within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application, document in writing to the applicant what specifically is needed. Failure of the applicant to submit the required information requested by the zoning official and to make the application complete or sufficient within thirty (30) calendar days of the written request by the zoning official or such extended time as granted by the zoning official shall be considered a withdrawal and the application fee shall be refunded less the administrative fee. Variance applications shall include but not be limited to the following where applicable as determined by the zoning official. 
(1)  A concept plan at an appropriate scale showing the related existing and proposed placement of structures on the property, provisions for ingress and egress, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, refuse and service areas and required yards and other spaces. 
(2)  A survey including a complete legal description of subject property which shows all existing improvements. 
(3)  A narrative description of the project in sufficient detail to provide an understanding of the nature of the variance requested and a statement describing how the requested variance meets the approval criteria for variances as set forth in this Code. 
(4)  Any plans, data or other information showing evidence supporting the requested variance, such as, bathometric surveys, floor plans, building elevations, cross sections of buildings, topography, or photographs. 
(e)  Action by county staff. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application and consistency with the comprehensive plan, Code of Ordinances, and the land development regulations. Upon receipt of a complete and valid application for a variance, the zoning official shall establish a date, time and place for the public hearing. Upon finding the application to be correct and complete, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the next available BZA meeting. Should an error in the application be discovered, the zoning official shall have the discretion to require the applicant to reapply or submit revised or additional information. The zoning official may require that site plans associated with variances be reviewed and comments provided to staff during the variance process, although no site plan approval shall be implied by this review. The zoning official shall investigate the conditions pertaining to a particular variance and shall submit a report to the BZA at the public hearing giving the facts involved and make a recommendation based on the application submitted, the facts known prior to the public hearing, and this Code. The final action by the BZA shall be documented by the zoning official in a decision letter to the applicant, copies of which shall be kept on file. The zoning official shall also create a notice of approval, which shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and made a part of the official records of Charlotte County. The original recorded notice of approval shall be kept on file and a copy mailed to the applicant. 
(f)  Notice of public hearing. The county shall provide notice of the public hearing to be held before the BZA in accordance with the following provisions. 
(1)  Published notice. Upon receipt of a complete and valid application for a variance, the zoning official shall establish a date, time and place for the public hearing. Published notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The published notice shall contain a description of the requested variance; address and legal description of subject property; the date, time and place of the public hearing; and shall invite all interested persons to appear and be heard. Failure to comply strictly with published notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(2)  Mailed notice. The owners of property located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property shall be mailed notice of the proposed variance at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the hearing. The mailed notice shall contain a description of the requested variance; address and legal description of subject property; the date, time and place of the public hearing; a phone number to contact the county for more information; and shall invite all interested persons to appear and be heard. Notice by mail shall be addressed to the property owner at the address shown in the latest available Charlotte County Property Appraiser Real Property Records. Such notice shall be considered effective when placed in the United States mail, postage paid. Failure to comply strictly with mailed notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(3)  Posted notice. A sign shall be posted conspicuously on the subject property. The sign shall contain a description of the requested variance; the date, time and place of the public hearing; and a phone number to contact the county for more information. The sign shall be placed on the subject property at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing. Failure to comply strictly with posted notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(g)  Action by applicant. The applicant, agent or attorney shall appear at the public hearing in person to testify under oath before the BZA, present their case for the application, and answer questions asked of them. The applicant may also initiate any of the following actions. 
(1)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant or a legally appointed representative may request that their application be withdrawn at any time. A request to withdraw an application must be in writing to the zoning official unless the applicant makes their request on the record at the scheduled public hearing before the BZA. A written statement of withdrawal shall be signed by all persons who signed the application or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official may authorize a refund of all or part of the application fee if an application is withdrawn more than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. If a request to withdraw an application is made less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing then no part of the application fee shall be refunded. 
(2)  Postponement of scheduled public hearing. If an applicant desires to postpone a scheduled public hearing they may request that the scheduled public hearing be postponed to any one (1) of the next four (4) available public hearings. A request to postpone the scheduled public hearing must be in writing and must be received by the zoning official at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The statement to postpone shall be signed by all persons who signed the application or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official shall then remove the application from the agenda and mail a notice, at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing, to the surrounding property owners who were mailed a notice of the original public hearing, notifying them that the application will not be heard at the originally scheduled public hearing but will be heard on the date and time of the requested public hearing. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(3)  Request for continuance from the zoning official or BZA. If an applicant desires to continue a public hearing less than fifteen (15) calendar days before the scheduled meeting, they must make such a request in writing to the zoning official prior to the public hearing, or to the BZA, at the public hearing. The zoning official may, one (1) time per application, based on extraordinary circumstances, grant a continuance to any one (1) of the next four (4) available public hearings. Other than the one (1) time grant of continuance by the zoning official. Extraordinary circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, sudden illness or medical condition, death, or discovery of a late objector with their consent. All requests to continue the scheduled public hearing may be granted or denied only by the BZA. The BZA may hold a portion of the public hearing to give those who are present a chance to testify and then continue any action on the matter. If the BZA determines that a continuance is appropriate they may continue action on any application to a date certain at one (1) of their next scheduled public hearings. If directed to do so by the BZA, as soon as practicable thereafter the zoning official shall mail a notice to the surrounding property owners notifying them that the application has been continued and will be heard on the date and time of the next scheduled public hearing. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(h)  Action by the BZA. The BZA shall hold a public hearing to obtain public input on the proposed variance. Following the public hearing, together with such other reports or testimony as may be relevant, the BZA may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested variance. 
(1)  Should the BZA deny a variance, the reasons for denial shall be stated and put in writing for the record. Such reasons shall be based on the approval criteria for variances stated in this Code as they may be applicable to the denial. 
(2)  Should the BZA approve a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by the variance as may be necessary to allow the positive finding of fact to be made on any of the foregoing factors approval criteria for variances or to minimize any negative effect of the variance. 
(3)  Continuance of BZA action. If the BZA determines that a continuance is appropriate, they may continue action on any application. If the BZA continues their action on any application to a date certain and directs the zoning official to mail notice of the continuance then as soon thereafter the zoning official shall mail a notice to the surrounding property owners notifying them that the application has been continued and will be acted on again at the date and time of the next scheduled public hearing and no additional noticing shall be required. If the BZA continues their action on any application without setting a date certain then the zoning official shall publish, mail, and post a notice for the next meeting at which the application will be acted upon according to the regular noticing requirements of this Code. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if required by the BZA. Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(i)  Approval criteria for variances. A variance shall be granted by the BZA only if all of the following approval criteria for variances are found to exist: 
(1)  Unique or peculiar conditions or circumstances exist, which relate to the location, size, and characteristics of the land or structure involved, and are not generally applicable to other lands or structures. 
(2)  The strict and literal enforcement of the zoning section of the land development regulations would create an undue hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience on the property owners. Physical handicaps or disability of the applicant and other considerations may be considered where relevant to the request. 
(3)  The granting of a variance would not be injurious to or incompatible with contiguous uses, the surrounding neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(4)  The condition giving rise to the requested variance has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property and the conditions cannot reasonably be corrected or avoided by the applicant. 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum modification of the regulation at issue that will afford relief. 
(j)  Effect of variance approval. Should the board of zoning appeals approve a variance, with or without conditions, the variance may be initiated and continued only if all of the other development standards of this Code and any conditions imposed by the BZA are maintained and complied with. 
Any violation of the conditions and safeguards that may be imposed on any variance by the BZA, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(k)  Time between similar applications. Whenever the BZA has denied an application for a variance, the BZA shall not thereafter consider an identical application for a variance concerning all or part of the same property for a period of six (6) months from the date of such action, except that this requirement may be waived by the positive votes of a majority of the members of the BZA when such action is deemed necessary. Should the variance application, which was denied, be modified, the one-year waiting period shall not apply. 
(l)  Administrative variances. If the variance requested is for relaxation of the minimum development standards of no more than ten (10) percent of the requirements or one (1) foot, whichever is greater, the owner may request that the zoning official grant an administrative variance. If, upon proper investigation, the administrative variance is not found to be harmful to adjoining land uses or adverse to the public interest, the zoning official may proceed to grant the administrative variance after the following procedure is completed and no written objection is received from an adjoining property owner within the time period specified. The zoning official shall review the application for sufficiency, which includes completeness of the application and consistency with the comprehensive plan, Code of Ordinances, and these land development regulations. 
(1)  Mailed notice. The owners of property immediately adjoining subject property shall be mailed notice of the zoning official's intention to grant a proposed administrative variance. This notice shall be mailed prior to, or on the same day, the published notice appears in the newspaper and shall also contain a description of the requested variance; address and legal description of subject property; the existence of the adjoining property owner's right to object in writing and receive a public hearing before the BZA, and a phone number to contact for more information. Notice by mail shall be addressed to the adjoining property owners shown in the latest available Charlotte County Property Appraiser real property records. Such notice shall be considered effective when placed in the United States mail, postage paid. Failure to comply strictly with mailed notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(2)  Published notice. As soon as practicable after receiving a complete and sufficient application for an administrative variance the zoning official shall publish a notice one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The published notice shall include a statement that the zoning official intends to grant the requested administrative variance; and also include a description of the requested variance; address and legal description of subject property; and the existence of an adjoining property owner's right to object in writing and receive a public hearing before the BZA. Failure to comply strictly with published notice requirements shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(3)  Action by objector. 
a.  Any adjoining property owner wishing to object to a proposed administrative variance shall submit a written objection within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the published notice appears in the newspaper. An adjoining property owner shall object in writing to the zoning official regarding a proposed administrative variance and request a public hearing of the matter before the BZA. Such objector shall state their name, the nature of their interest, and the nature of their objection to the proposed administrative variance. Any adjoining property owner wishing to object to a proposed administrative variance shall also attend the scheduled public hearing in person, or by agent or attorney, to testify before the BZA, state the reasons for their objection and answer questions asked of them. 
b.  Any objections from other than the adjoining property owners shall be taken into consideration by the zoning official when making a determination on the administrative variance request. 
(4)  Action by applicant. If there is a valid objector and the administrative variance is required to go before the BZA then the applicant shall appear at the public hearing in person, or by agent or attorney, to testify before the BZA, present their case for the application, and answer questions asked of them. The applicant may also initiate any of the following actions; withdrawal of an application, postponement of a scheduled public hearing, or request a continuance by the BZA according to the same procedures stated elsewhere in this section of the Code. 
(5)  Action by zoning official. The zoning official shall make a determination to deny or approve the requested administrative variance. The final action by the zoning official, or the BZA, shall be documented by the zoning official in a decision letter to the applicant, copies of which shall be kept on file. The zoning official shall also create a notice of approval, which shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court and made a part of the official records of Charlotte County. A copy of the recorded notice of approval shall also be mailed to the applicant. 
a.  If the zoning official should deny an application for an administrative variance, the zoning official shall state fully in writing to the applicant the reasons for denial. Such reasons shall take into account the comprehensive plan, Code of Ordinances, and the land development regulations as they may be applicable to the denial. 
b.  Should the zoning official determine that the requested administrative variance may be approved, the zoning official shall mail and publish the notices required by this Code. 
c.  If the zoning official does not receive a written objection within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the published notice appears in the newspaper the zoning official may approve the administrative variance requested. 
d.  If the zoning official does receive a written objection from an adjoining property owner within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the published notice appears in the newspaper then the zoning official shall schedule a public hearing before the BZA regarding the administrative variance requested and notice that public hearing according to requirements for a regular variance in this Code. The applicant shall be responsible for all additional cost incurred by the county for mailing and publishing additional notices. 
(6)  Action by board of zoning appeals. If the zoning official receives a valid written objection from an adjoining property owner, the BZA shall hold a public hearing to obtain public input on the proposed administrative variance. Following the public hearing the BZA may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed administrative variance. The BZA shall state the reasons for their decision, which shall be put in writing for the record, utilizing variance procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-043, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-012, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-18; Ord. No. 2020-016, § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-20) 
Sec. 3-9-7. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Applicability and procedure. The following procedure shall apply to any request for development except individual single-family homes, individual duplex or individual triplex; notwithstanding the foregoing, the zoning official may exempt from or include within the site plan review process any development project. 
(b)  Initiation. A request for site plan review may be initiated by anyone with a legal interest in the property; however, an applicant who is not the owner of the subject property shall be required to present evidence of legal authority from the owner to submit an application. The survey, engineering plans, landscaping plans, and building plans shall be prepared by a Florida registered surveyor, professional engineer, or architect, respectively. The site plan review process shall consist of either a bifurcated preliminary and final review or a single comprehensive review. 
(c)  Application requirements. A request for site plan review shall be submitted in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Forms. Applications required under this section shall be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the zoning official. 
(2)  Fees. 
a.  All applications and associated fees shall be filed with the community development department upon submission of an application. 
b.  The BCC shall, by resolution, fix reasonable permit fees to be charged by the zoning official. These fees shall be reviewed on an annual basis. 
c.  An applicant who has paid the appropriate fee, but who chooses to withdraw their application prior to its distribution for review shall be entitled to a refund of the total amount paid minus a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) but up to a maximum of ten (10) percent for administrative costs, upon written request to the community development department. Once review has begun, no refund shall be available. 
(3)  Application processing. 
a.  Completeness review. All applications must be deemed complete by the zoning official for processing before the county is required to review the application content. During the completeness review process, no additions or modifications may be made to the submittal unless requested or agreed to by the zoning official. This review shall be completed within two (2) business days. The zoning official may waive the strict requirements of this section. 
b.  Sufficiency review. The sufficiency review shall be completed within five (5) business days of the completeness review, and a written notice of any insufficiencies in the application will be provided to the applicant. The notice shall request the applicant to provide any required additional or corrected information. The applicant shall have ten (10) business days from the date of the notice of insufficiency in the application to supply the information required in order for the application to be accepted for review, or such longer time as may be specified in the notice at the discretion of the zoning official. 
c.  Site plan review. Once an application is determined to be sufficient for processing, the applicant shall be notified that the application has been accepted for review, copies of the application shall be referred to the appropriate reviewing entities, and the process of notification and public hearings, if any, required for the application shall begin. The site plan review cycle shall be a maximum of three (3) weeks from the Thursday following the date the application is deemed sufficient unless extended by the zoning official. 
(4)  Simultaneous applications. 
a.  If approved by the zoning official, applications for other development approvals may be filed and reviewed concurrently. Any application that also requires a variance and/or special exception shall not be eligible for final approval until the variance and/or special exception has been granted. 
(d)  Amendments and changes to land development regulations. All changes, amendments or additions to this Code shall apply to any final site plan application except for those with current preliminary site plan approval at the time of adoption of changes, amendments, or additions to this Code. Should the preliminary site plan approval expire, the changes, amendments or additions shall apply to future application. 
(e)  Preliminary site plan review. 
(1)  Action by review agencies. Review agencies, including community development, public works, utilities, and any other departments designated by the county administrator, shall review site plans for consistency with the adopted plans, policies and regulations of the county and the requirements of this section. All review comments and conditions must be made during the preliminary review, no additional comments or conditions may be made at final approval, unless authorized by the zoning official. 
(2)  Action by zoning official. The zoning official shall review the application for consistency with the comprehensive plan and these land development regulations. The zoning official shall issue the final decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan application. Where the zoning official denies the application, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing for the record. 
(3)  Approval criteria. In evaluating any proposed site plan, the zoning official shall consider the following: 
a.  The extent to which the proposed site plan is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
b.  The extent to which the proposed site plan is consistent with these land development regulations. 
(4)  Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary site plan approval shall not be construed as a recommendation to authorize any permits. It represents a general acceptance of the site plan and places appropriate conditions on the approval to ensure compliance with this section. 
(5)  Period of validity. The preliminary site plan approval shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of zoning official approval and within which application for final approval must be filed. Up to two (2) extensions of up to twelve (12) months each may be granted by the zoning official upon filing such request a minimum of one (1) month prior to the expiration date. Such extension must be requested in writing and with payment of the appropriate fee. 
(f)  Final site plan review. 
(1)  Action by review agencies. Review agencies including community development, public works, utilities, and any other departments designated by the county administrator shall review final site plans for consistency and the approved preliminary site plan, taking into account all previously made review comments. 
(2)  Action by zoning official. After considering the review agencies comments, the zoning official shall review the final site plan for consistency with this section and the approved preliminary site plan, taking into account all previously made review comments. The zoning official shall then issue the final decision to approve, approve with modifications, or deny the site plan application. Where the zoning official denies the application, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing for the record. 
(3)  Effect of final site plan approval. Final site plan approval indicates an acceptance of the site plan by the zoning official and authorizes applicants to apply for a building permit. The decision of the zoning official shall be final and only appealable by the applicant within thirty (30) days of the written notice of decision to the BZA. By obtaining a building permit, the applicant waives the right to appeal. Conditional approvals may only be granted by the zoning official. 
(4)  Period of validity. The final site plan shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of zoning official approval. One (1) two-year extension may be granted at the discretion of the zoning official. No additional extensions will be granted thereafter. If a portion of the approved final site plan has been constructed and received a certificate of occupancy, the remainder of the approved plan shall remain valid unless a major modification is requested. 
(g)  Conformity to plan. All development and construction activity must conform to the approved final site plan. As a condition to the granting of a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall file a certificate by a registered engineer or architect that all development and construction activity has conformed to the approved final site plan. 
(h)  Modification of site plans. Any proposed amendment, deviation or change to an approved site plan must be reviewed by the zoning official to determine whether the proposed change constitutes a minor or major modification. Such a request must be filed in writing, and a written determination will be rendered within ten (10) working days of such request. The applicant may appeal the decision of the zoning official within thirty (30) days of the written determination to the BZA. 
(1)  Minor modifications are slight variations or alterations to the site plan such as a shift of a building footprint, deletion of excess parking spaces, etc., which cannot reasonably be expected to cause a change in the internal functioning of the site or its off-site impacts. Minor modifications may be authorized by the zoning official, or his/her designee, when determined to be consistent with the approved site plan. Such a request must be filed stating the nature of the request and justification for such, as well as an updated site plan illustrating the proposed change. The zoning official shall provide written response within ten (10) working days to the applicant. If the zoning official denies the minor modification, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the response. Regardless of whether the minor modification is approved prior to or after a building permit has been issued, the applicant may proceed with the requested change upon a favorable decision from the zoning official. 
Minor modifications generally meet the following standards: 
a.  Does not substantially alter the location of any points of access to the site. 
b.  Does not change the general site plan in a manner which requires additional site plan approval or the parameters of development remain unchanged. 
c.  Does not increase the density or intensity of the development to occur on the property. 
d.  Does not result in a reduction of previously required open space, minimal setbacks, general building location, or landscaping counts. 
e.  Is consistent with the general intent and purpose of this Code. 
f.  Does not result in a material modification or the cancellation of any condition placed upon the site plan as originally approved. 
g.  Does not add additional property to the site. 
h.  Does not substantially change the internal or external traffic pattern. 
i.  Does not increase the height of the building(s) including approved rooftop appurtenances by more than ten (10) percent of such building height. 
j.  Does not increase the floor area by more than five hundred (500) square feet. 
(2)  Major modifications are non-minor additions, deletions or changes in the use, density and location of structures of an approved site plan. Other modifications may be determined to be major if the zoning official determines they deviate substantially from an approved site plan and can reasonably be expected to cause adverse changes in internal functions or its off-site impacts. Such changes need to be reviewed by the zoning official in the same manner as a new application. 
(Ord. No. 2014-044, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— The zoning atlas is on file in the office of the clerk to the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 3-9-8. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
(a)  District regulations extend to all portions of districts surrounded by boundaries. Except as otherwise provided, a district symbol shown within boundaries on the official zoning atlas indicates that district regulations pertaining to the identified district extend throughout the entire area surrounded by the boundary line. 
(b)  Uncertain boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the official zoning atlas, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries which appear to follow the centerlines of dedicated streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way shall be construed as following such centerlines as they exist on the ground. If a street is vacated, the boundaries shall remain in the same location as before the street vacation. 
(2)  Boundaries which appear to follow lot, boundary or property lines shall be construed as following such lines as they exist on the ground; provided, however, that where such lot, boundary or property line are adjacent to a dedicated street, alley, highway or right-of-way, the boundaries shall be construed as running to the middle of the street, alley, highway or right-of-way. If a street is vacated, the boundaries shall remain in the same location as before the street vacation. 
(3)  Boundaries which appear to follow city or county limits shall be construed as following such city or county limits as they exist on the ground. 
(4)  Boundaries which appear to follow railroad tracks or rights-of-way shall be construed as following the centerline of the railroad tracks or rights-of-way as they exist on the ground. 
(5)  Boundaries which appear to follow mean high water lines or centerlines of streams, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed as following such mean high water lines or centerlines. In case of a change in mean high water line or the course of bodies of water, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the change in the location of the mean high water line or centerline. 
(6)  Boundaries which appear to enter a body of water but do not continue to the intersection with another zoning district boundary or with the limits of jurisdiction of the county shall be construed as extending in the direction in which they run to the point of intersection with another zoning boundary or with the limits of county jurisdiction. 
(7)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of land or water features described in paragraphs (1)—(6) above shall be construed as being parallel to or extensions of such features. 
(8)  Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning atlas shall be determined by the scale of the map on each page of the zoning atlas. 
(c)  Cases not covered above. In cases not covered by the foregoing provisions of this section, or where the property or street layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the official zoning atlas, the zoning official shall interrupt the official zoning atlas according to the intent and purpose of this chapter. Appeal from the interpretation of the zoning official shall be to the board of zoning appeals pursuant to the procedure provided in section 3-9-6. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 4; Ord. No. 2015-017, § 1, 4-28-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-017, § 1, adopted April 28, 2015, repealed the former § 3-9-8, and renumbered former §§ 3-9-9—3-9-11 as §§ 3-9-8—3-9-10. The former § 3-9-8 pertained to establishment of zoning districts and official zoning atlas and derived from Minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 3; and Ord. No. 94-50, § 1, adopted Nov. 3, 1994. 
Sec. 3-9-9. - Legal nonconformities. 
(a)  Intent. At the time the ordinance from which this chapter derives becomes effective or is amended, there may exist lots, structures, uses of land or water or characteristics of use which were lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of the regulations herein, but are prohibited, regulated or restricted by these regulations or amendments thereto. It is the intent of these regulations that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, intensified or extended, nor shall they be used as a basis for the addition of other structures or uses otherwise prohibited in the same district. 
(b)  Continuation of nonconformity. 
(1)  A lot, use, building or structure lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives which is made nonconforming by the regulations herein or an amendment thereto may be continued except as otherwise provided by these regulations. 
(2)  Disaster recovery on the bridgeless barrier islands. Following a natural disaster, as determined by the BCC, a structure that was legally nonconforming at the time of the disaster may be replaced or restored on the original footprint. There shall be no increase in square footage or residential density beyond what originally existed. All construction shall be in compliance with applicable county, state and federal standards. 
(c)  Nonconforming lots of record. 
(1)  "Nonconforming or substandard lot" shall mean a lot of which the area, dimension or location was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter and which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  For the purpose of this chapter, a lot is "created" on such date that one (1) of the following conditions occur: 
a.  The date that a deed for said lot is lawfully first recorded in the public records of the county; or 
b.  The date that a subdivision plat has been lawfully recorded in the public records of the county and the lot is a part of the subdivision. 
(3)  Nonconforming lots of record may be developed provided: 
a.  The proposed development meets all the requirements of this Code, except that residential lots which are nonconforming because of width may reduce the required side yard to ten (10) percent of the lot width. No required side yard shall be less than five (5) feet. 
b.  The burden of proof to establish that the lot is legally nonconforming and legally existing on October 22, 1990, shall be with the owner. 
(4)  Nonconforming multifamily lot: Any lot, platted and recorded on the effective date of the regulation from which this section is derived, which is located in a zoning district that permits multifamily residential dwellings and which exceeds in area the minimum lot size for the district but which does not contain the area required by the district for two (2) dwelling units nevertheless may have constructed on it two (2) dwelling units. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the density shall not exceed the maximum density permitted by the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Restrictions. 
a.  No division of any buildable lot may be permitted which creates a lot with width, depth, or area below the minimum requirements stated in this section unless the lot that is below the minimum requirements is for one (1) or more of the following uses: park, open space, or utilities. 
b.  Contiguous lots of record may be combined and redivided to create larger dimension lots of record as long as such recombination includes the total area of the lots. 
(d)  Current nonconforming use. A use that was legally nonconforming on the effective date of these regulations [November 25, 2014], may be continued provided: 
(1)  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, intensified, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than it occupied on the effective date of this chapter; 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use on the effective date of this chapter. 
(3)  If any nonconforming use ceases for a period to exceed one (1) year for any reason except when governmental action impedes use, any subsequent use shall conform to the applicable district regulations. 
(e)  Conforming uses. 
(1)  All uses permitted through the previous zoning districts (1989 version, as may be amended) shall be deemed permitted until such time as a rezoning takes place after December 8, 2014. All development standards set forth in this Code shall apply to any future development of the property. 
(2)  All existing uses permitted through the previous zoning districts (1989 version, as may be amended) shall be deemed conforming. All development standards set forth in this Code shall apply to any future development of the property. 
(f)  Nonconforming structures. A structure lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives which is made nonconforming by the regulation herein or any amendment thereto may be continued provided: 
(1)  Nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or moved until brought into compliance with this Code, such as through the approval of a variance or physical modification of the structure unless the enlargement or moving of the structure does not increase the nonconformity. 
(2)  Only ordinary repairs and maintenance, including repair or replacement of roof covering, walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, shall be permitted. 
(3)  If any such nonconforming structure is destroyed to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction as determined by the replacement valuation on the most recent county tax roll, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-045, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-017, § 1, 4-28-15) 
Note— See editor's note at § 3-9-8. 
Sec. 3-9-10. - Amendments. 
(a)  Generally. This Chapter, the Official Zoning Atlas or the county's comprehensive plan may, from time to time, be amended or repealed as provided in this section and Florida Statutes as applicable. 
(b)  Initiation of proposals for amendments. An amendment to the county's comprehensive plan, land development regulations or the zoning atlas may be proposed by anyone with a legal interest in the property. However, an applicant who is not the owner of the subject property shall be required to present evidence of legal authority from the owner to submit an application. Amendments to the county's comprehensive plan shall also comply with any other applicable regulations found in F.S. sections 163.3184 and 163.3187, as amended. 
(c)  Written petition. Applications for rezoning shall be obtained from and filed with the appropriate county department and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee to be established by resolution of the BCC. No application for zoning amendment shall be heard by the P&Z board until such fees and charges have been paid by the petitioner or waived by the BCC. The department director or his/her designee shall review the application for sufficiency and completeness. If additional information is required, the department director or his/her designee shall advise the applicant within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application. Upon finding the application to be correct and complete, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the P&Z board at the next available meeting. The department director or his/her designee shall also review the application for consistency with the comprehensive plan and the applicable land development regulations used to implement the comprehensive plan. Should any conflict exist as a result of the consistency review, the applicant shall be advised of such at least five (5) days prior to the P&Z board meeting at which the application is scheduled to be heard. At a minimum, applications for rezoning shall include the following: 
(1)  A certified survey of the property to be rezoned. 
(2)  A legal description of the entire property to be rezoned, including the size of the parcel involved. 
(3)  A narrative stating the applicant's justification for the rezoning request based upon the standards for approval of such a rezoning request set forth in subsection (h)(1). 
(d)  Published notice. No request for a zoning amendment may be considered by the P&Z board until such time as notice of a public hearing on the proposed amendment has been given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of the public hearing. 
(e)  Mailed notice. 
(1)  The county shall notify the owner of each property located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property via first-class mail sent to the last address listed for each owner in the Charlotte County Property Appraiser Real Property Records. 
(2)  The notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the P&Z public hearing and at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of each BCC public hearing. 
(3)  Mailed notices under this section are not required for applications initiated by Charlotte County. However, the county shall publish notice of all required hearings as provided for in this Code. The county may also send mailed notices to surrounding property owners at its discretion. 
(4)  Failure to receive a mailed notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. 
(f)  Posted notice. The county shall post notice at the subject property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing at which the application will be heard. The notice shall contain the time, date and place of the public hearing and shall state the action being considered. The notice shall be posted on the subject property or at a point visible from the nearest public street. 
(g)  Constructive notice. Minor defects in notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings if a good faith attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. 
(h)  Standards for approval. 
(1)  For the rezoning of land, the recommendations of the P&Z board and decision of the board of county commissioners (BCC) shall be made after giving due consideration to: 
a.  Whether the proposed change is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
b.  The existing land use pattern in adjacent areas; 
c.  The capacity of public facilities and services, including but not limited to schools, roads, recreational facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply, and stormwater drainage facilities; 
d.  Whether the proposed change will adversely influence living conditions or property values in adjacent areas; 
e.  Whether the proposed change will affect public safety; 
(2)  Decision of the BCC: 
a.  The BCC must find that the applicant has shown the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan and complies with all procedural requirements of this zoning code; 
b.  Upon making such a positive finding, if the BCC wishes to deny the petition then the burden shifts to the BCC to demonstrate that maintaining the existing zoning classification with respect to the property accomplishes a legitimate public purpose. 
(3)  When pertaining to other proposed amendments of these zoning regulations, the P&Z board shall consider: 
a.  The need and justification for the proposed change; and 
b.  The relationship of the proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
(i)  Board of county commissioners action on P&Z board recommendations. Upon receipt of the P&Z board recommendations, the BCC shall hold a second public hearing with notice to be given as required by law (F.S. section 125.66) and by subsections (d), (e), and (f) above. 
(j)  Notice of decision. Written notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant and a copy shall be placed on file with the county within ten (10) business days of a decision being rendered, where it shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. A copy of the ordinance adopting the change shall be sent to the applicant after the ordinance is recorded by the county clerk. 
(k)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant or legally appointed representative may request the withdrawal of a previously submitted application at any time. A request to withdraw an application shall be provided in writing to the zoning official unless the applicant requests such withdrawal on the record at a scheduled public hearing. A written request shall be signed by all persons who signed the application or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official may authorize a refund of all or part of the application fee if an application is withdrawn more than four (4) weeks prior to the first scheduled public hearing. If a request to withdraw an application is made less than four (4) weeks prior to the first scheduled public hearing, then no part of the application fee shall be refunded. 
(l)  Postponement of scheduled public hearings by applicant(s). An applicant may request postponement of a scheduled public hearing to any one (1) of the next four (4) scheduled public meeting dates of the presiding board provided that such date is available. A request to postpone the scheduled public hearing must be made in writing and must be received by the zoning official at least fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The request shall be signed by all persons who signed the application or by a legally appointed representative. The zoning official shall remove the application from the agenda and mail notice of such change to all property owners included in the original mailing. The notice of change shall indicate the application's postponement of public hearing and shall include the date and time of the rescheduled public hearing if such information is available. If the date and time of the rescheduled public hearing is not available at the time of this mailing, a separate notice of public hearing shall be mailed in accordance with the requirements of subsection (e) above. The applicant shall pay the cost of all additional published and mailed notices if such notices are required. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 12; Res. No. 87-257, §§ 5, 6, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 91-53, § 1, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 2015-017, § 1, 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-049, § 1(Exh. A), 10-27-15; Ord. No. 2018-012, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-18; Ord. No. 2020-016, § 1(Exh. A), 4-14-20) 
Note— See editor's note at § 3-9-8. 
Sec. 3-9-10.1. - Development of regional impact (DRI) development order (DO) amendment process and procedure. 
(a)  Intent. The development of regional impact (DRI) as defined by F.S. section 380.06 may, from time to time, be amended as provided in this Section and requirements set forth in F.S. section 380.06. The county has the following DRIs: 
(1)  Babcock Ranch Community DRI; 
(2)  Deep Creek Gardens; 
(3)  Harborview DRI; 
(4)  Murdock Center DRI; 
(5)  Riverwood DRI; 
(6)  Sandhill DRI; 
(7)  Tern Bay DRI; 
(8)  Victoria DRI. 
(b)  Initiation of proposals for amendments. An amendment to DRI development order (DO) may be proposed by a property owner within such DRI or an applicant with the property owner's authorization. 
(c)  Written petition. Applications for an amendment to an approved DRI DO shall be obtained from and filed with the appropriate county department and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee to be established by resolution of the BCC. No application for such amendment shall be heard by the P&Z board until such fees and charges have been paid by the applicant or waived by the BCC. The department director or his/her designee shall review the application for sufficiency and completeness. If additional information is required, the department director or his/her designee shall advise the applicant within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application. Upon finding the application to be correct and complete, it shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the P&Z board at the next available meeting. The department director or his/her designee shall also review the application for consistency with the comprehensive plan and the requirements set forth in F.S. section 380.06. Should any conflict exist as a result of the consistency review, the applicant shall be advised of such at least five (5) days prior to the P&Z board meeting at which the application is scheduled to be heard. At a minimum, applications for such amendment shall include the following: 
(1)  A certified survey and a legal description of the DRI boundary, including the size of the parcel involved. 
(2)  A narrative stating the applicant's justification for the amendment request based upon the standards for approval of such request set forth in subsection (e). 
(d)  Notification. Notification shall be complied with the requirements set forth in section 3-9-10, amendments. 
(e)  Standards for approval. 
(1)  For those changes that have the effect of reducing the originally approved height, density or intensity of development, such change must be reviewed based on the standards of the comprehensive plan in effect when the DRI was approved; all other proposed changes must be consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  Whether the proposed change is consistent with requirements set forth in F.S. section 380.06, as maybe amended. 
(f)  Board of county commissioners (BCC) action on P&Z board recommendations. Upon receipt of the P&Z board recommendations, the BCC shall hold a second public hearing with notice to be given as required by law (F.S. section 360.08) and by subsections (d) and (e) above. The BCC shall approve, with or without conditions, or deny the proposed change in accordance with F.S. section 360.80. 
(g)  Notice of decision. Written notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant and a copy shall be placed on file with the county within ten (10) business days of a decision being rendered, where it shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours. A copy of the ordinance adopting the change shall be sent to the applicant after the ordinance is recorded by the county clerk. 
(h)  Withdrawal of application. An applicant or legally appointed representative may request the withdrawal of a previously submitted application at any time and such request must be complied with the requirements set forth in section 3-9-10, amendments. 
(i)  Postponement of scheduled public hearings by applicant(s). An applicant may request postponement of a scheduled public hearing to any one (1) of the next four (4) scheduled public meeting dates of the presiding Board provided that such date is available and such request must be complied with the requirements set forth in section 3-9-10, amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2018-049, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18; Ord. No. 2018-050, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-10.2. - Development of regional impact (DRI) development order (DO) monitoring report. 
(a)  The developer is required to submit a biennial report on a development of regional impact (DRI) to the county if all requirements set forth in such DRI development order (DO) have not be fulfilled. Such report shall be submitted to the county within thirty (30) days after the end of the reporting period. If the county does not receive a biennial report on time, a final detail site plan or a final site plan shall not be approved until a report is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-049, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18; Ord. No. 2018-053, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18) 
Secs. 3-9-11—3-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-9-26. - Districts. 
Districts defined in this chapter and delineated on the official zoning atlas are. 

 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 7; Res. No. 85-313, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 89-34, § 1, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 94-54, § 1, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 2003-067, § 1, 10-14-03) 
Editor's note— The following ordinances created overlay districts: 

 
Sec. 3-9-26.1. - Prohibited uses. 
(Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 24, 2017, redesignated the former §§ 3-9-26.1—3-9-26.4 as new §§ 3-9-26.2—3-9-36.5 to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 3-9-26.2. - Use table—Environmental and agricultural districts. 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-046, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-17) 
Note— See editor's note regarding redesignation at § 3-9-26.1. 
Sec. 3-9-26.3. - Use table—Residential districts. 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-051, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-17; Ord. No. 2020-041, § 1(Exh. A), 10-27-20) 
Note— See editor's note regarding redesignation at § 3-9-26.1. 
  
Sec. 3-9-26.4. - Use table—Commercial districts. 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-059, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-17) 
Note— See editor's note regarding redesignation at § 3-9-26.1. 
Sec. 3-9-26.5. - Use table—Industrial districts. 

 
(Ord. No. 2014-064, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2017-047, § 1(Exh. A), 10-24-17) 
Note— See editor's note regarding redesignation at § 3-9-26.1. 
Sec. 3-9-27. - Application of district regulations. 
(a)  Use or occupancy. No building, structure, land, water or part thereof shall be used, occupied, erected, constructed, reconstructed, located, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located or as otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Multiple use of required open space prohibited. No part of a required yard, off-street parking or off-street loading space or other open space provided in connection with a building, structure or use shall be included as meeting the requirements for any other building, structure or use except where specific provision therefor is made in this chapter. 
(c)  Lot area. 
(1)  No lot or yard existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be reduced in size, dimension or area below the minimum requirements of the district in which it is located unless such reduction results from an acquisition for public use or is permitted by an approved development plan. Lots or yards created after such effective date shall meet at least the minimum requirements established herein. Notwithstanding the forgoing, nonconforming lots may be reconfigured to an equal or lesser number of lots to enhance buildability. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for any lot less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area or less than fifty (50) feet in width, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter or approved by the board of zoning appeals (BZA). 
(3)  Where any street, highway, alley or right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned subsequent to the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment. 
(4)  Where a district boundary divides a lot (as defined in section 3-9-2), the location of such boundary shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the official zoning atlas, unless the same is indicated by dimensions on the official zoning atlas. The zoning official shall have final authority to make such determination. 
(5)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot (as defined in section 3-9-2) on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, the BZA may, in its discretion, permit a use authorized in either portion of such lot to extend to the entire lot, upon good cause shown. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 5; Ord. No. 2014-067, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— The zoning regulations became effective on December 8, 1981. 
Sec. 3-9-28. - Environmentally sensitive (ES). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to preserve and protect land and water areas which have ecological, hydrological, or physiographic importance to the public at large. It is intended to preserve and protect open spaces, park lands, wilderness areas, marshlands, watersheds and water recharge areas, scenic areas, beaches, and native flora and fauna. It is intended to allow limited public or private recreational and educational uses and their incidental accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  Fish and wildlife management area, nature preserve. 
(2)  Gamelands, public and private. 
(3)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(4)  Outdoor educational facility. 
(5)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(6)  Single-family detached. Detached single-family homes may or may not have a guest suite that is structurally attached with or without cooking facilities. 
(7)  Water conservation areas, reservoirs and control structures, drainage systems and water wells. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Boat lifts and boat ramps. 
(2)  Carports, garages, and storage structures. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area shall be compatible in appearance with the primary residence, at a minimum, materials and color shall be compatible with the primary residence. 
b.  The total footprint of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(3)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district 
(5)  Keeping of pets excluding animal breeding, boarding and training. 
(6)  Noncommercial boat docks may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(7)  Swimming pools, tennis court or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures). 
(1)  Bed and breakfast, 1 or 2 bedrooms. 
(2)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structures not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(3)  Campground. 
(4)  Emergency services. 
(5)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(6)  Government uses and facilities. 
(7)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(i)  Signs. Signs should be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 7; Ord. No. 89-34, § 2, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ 1—3, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2014-047, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-29. - Parks and recreation (PKR). 
(a)  Intent: The purpose and intent of this district is to provide land for recreational opportunities, as well as to protect and preserve submerged lands in the county extending seaward from the mean high-water line or bulkhead line. Canals, manmade lakes, ponds, and water impoundment areas are specifically excluded from the operation of this section. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  The following uses and structures shall only apply to uplands: 
a.  Boat ramps. 
b.  Cemetery, mausoleum. 
c.  Community garden. 
d.  Golf course. 
e.  Government uses and facilities. 
f.  Outdoor educational facility. 
g.  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
h.  Recreation, indoor. 
i.  Recreation, outdoor. 
j.  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (see section 3-9-68, communication towers) 
(2)  The following uses and structures shall only apply to submerged lands: 
a.  Boat docks, boat lifts, ramps and piers. 
b.  Navigational markers and signal devices. 
c.  Seawalls, bulkheads, riprap, and similar structures. 
d.  Uses such as boating, swimming, fishing, diving, water skiing, surfboarding, wading, and similar activities. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures shall only apply to uplands: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are permitted in this district, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Fences or walls may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C) shall only apply to uplands: (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Livestock breeding, boarding, training, and grazing. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  The following uses shall only apply to uplands: 
a.  Amphitheater. 
b.  Animal sanctuary, zoo. 
c.  Auditorium, convention center, performing arts center. 
d.  Campground. 
e.  Clubhouse, community center. 
f.  Leisure vehicle rental. 
g.  Marina. 
h.  Motor sports track, venue. 
i.  Outdoor market or exhibition space. 
j.  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship). 
k.  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(2)  The following uses shall only apply to submerged lands: 
a.  Boat houses. 
b.  Houseboats and boats used for living purposes. (See section 3-9-65.1, boats used for living purposes; houseboats.) 
c.  Mooring fields. 
(3)  Principal structures and uses which relate directly and immediately to permitted uses in upland zoning classifications abutting a PKR district. 
Such other uses in uplands and submerged lands as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
All uses within this district are subject to all regulations and permitting procedures of all agencies having jurisdiction over county waters. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
See section 3-9-65.1, "boats used for living purposes; houseboats." 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs for uplands should be in accordance with section 3-9-85. All signs are prohibited except signs for navigations, warning, trespassing and caution. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-048, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-048, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former § 3-9-29, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3-9-29 pertained to marine park (MP) and derived from minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 7; Ord. No. 89-34, § 3, adopted May 31, 1989; Ord. No. 94-55, § 4, adopted Nov. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2002. 
Sec. 3-9-30. - Agriculture (AG). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow agriculture, very-low-density residential, rural recreation, and other rural uses. Agriculture and agricultural activities are frequently associated with noise, odors, dust, aerial chemical spraying, and other activities generally incompatible with urban-style living. However, agriculture forms a vital segment of the economy of the state, and provides diversity of economic opportunity and lifestyles for the county. Therefore, it is the purpose of this district to provide areas for the establishment and/or continuation of agricultural operations with residential uses being permitted only at very low densities and to accommodate those individuals who understand and desire to live in an agricultural environment. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Biofuel production, less than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. 
(4)  Cemetery, mausoleum. 
(5)  Community garden. 
(6)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop and vegetable production, cultivation, packing, and storage. 
(7)  Domestic animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(8)  Emergency services. 
(9)  Fish and wildlife management area, nature preserve. 
(10)  Fish hatchery. 
(11)  Gamelands, public or private. 
(12)  Harvesting, cultivation, processing, and sale of crops grown on premises, including silviculture, aquaculture, and commercial citriculture. 
(13)  Horse stable, barn, workshop, and other structures and uses incidental to agricultural uses. 
(14)  Livestock breeding, boarding, training, and grazing. 
(15)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(16)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(17)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(18)  Outdoor educational facility. 
(19)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(20)  Plant nursery. 
(21)  Raising of poultry. 
(22)  Single-family detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(23)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(24)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Agricultural accessory uses and structures may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(2)  Carports, garages, and storage structures associated with agricultural uses may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(3)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(5)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(6)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(2)  Conservation subdivision. 
(3)  Farm labor housing. 
(4)  Guest home. 
(5)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. 
(6)  Minor yard trash processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(1)  Park models and recreational vehicles for living purposes. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  Agricultural industrial activities, leather tanning, wool processing, meat curing. 
(2)  Airport. 
(3)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(4)  Amphitheater. 
(5)  Animal hospital with indoor or outdoor facilities. 
(6)  Animal and poultry slaughter, stockyards, rendering. 
(7)  Animal sanctuary, zoo. 
(8)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(9)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(10)  Biofuel production, five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(11)  Biofuel production, greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(12)  Campground. 
(13)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(14)  Cluster housing. (See section 3-9-67, cluster housing.) 
(15)  Composting facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(16)  Concentrated animal feeding operation. 
(17)  Correctional facility. 
(18)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable processing. 
(19)  Elementary, middle or high school. 
(20)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(21)  Exotic animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(22)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(23)  Fertilizer manufacturing. 
(24)  Gas station. 
(25)  Government uses and facilities. 
(26)  Heliport, helistop. 
(27)  Livestock auction. 
(28)  Lumberyard. 
(29)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(30)  Motor sports track, venue. 
(31)  Outdoor market space or exhibition space. 
(32)  Pistol, rifle, skeet, trap shooting and archery ranges. 
(33)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(34)  Power plant. 
(35)  Private clubs. 
(36)  Private landing field. 
(37)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(38)  Sawmill, machine shop. 
(39)  Single-family residences used as a foster care facilities. 
(40)  Transfer station. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(41)  University or college. 
(42)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(i)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(Ord. No. 2014-049, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-049, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former § 3-9-30, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3-9-30 pertained to Agriculture (AG and AE) and derived from Minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 7; Res. No. 85-286, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 1985; Res. No. 87-78, §§ 5, 6, adopted May 19, 1987; Ord. No. 87-17, § 1, adopted May 19, 1987; Res. No. 87-254, § 15, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Ord. No. 89-34, § 4, adopted May 31, 1989; Ord. No. 91-04, §§ 1—6, adopted Feb. 26, 1991; Ord. No. 92-39, § 1, adopted June 2, 1992; Ord. No. 93-17 § 1, adopted April 20, 1993; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ 7, 8, adopted Nov. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 2, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; and Ord. No. 2003-061, §§ 3—5, adopted Aug. 25, 2003. 
Sec. 3-9-31. - Excavation and mining (EM). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow agriculture, very-low density residential, rural recreation, other rural uses, and commercial excavation activities and associated uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Biofuel production, less than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. 
(4)  Cemetery, mausoleum. 
(5)  Commercial excavation. 
(6)  Community garden. 
(7)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable production, cultivation, packing, and storage. 
(8)  Domestic animal breeding, boarding and training. 
(9)  Emergency services. 
(10)  Fish and wildlife management area, nature preserve. 
(11)  Fish hatchery. 
(12)  Gamelands, public or private. 
(13)  Harvesting, cultivation, processing, and sale of crops grown on premises, including silviculture, aquaculture, and commercial citriculture. 
(14)  Horse stable, barn, workshop, and other structures and uses incidental to agricultural uses. 
(15)  Livestock breeding, boarding, training, and grazing. 
(16)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(17)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(18)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(19)  Outdoor educational facility. 
(20)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(21)  Plant nursery. 
(22)  Raising of poultry. 
(23)  Single-family detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(24)  Stockpiling of fill. 
(25)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(26)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted and conditional uses and structures are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Agricultural accessory uses and structures may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(2)  Asphalt plant or concrete batch plant, associated with a commercial excavation. 
(3)  Carports, garages, and storage structures associated with agricultural uses may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(5)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(6)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(7)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(2)  Conservation subdivision. 
(3)  Farm labor housing. 
(4)  Guest home. 
(5)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. 
(6)  Minor yard trash processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not specifically, or by reasonable implication, permitted herein shall be unlawful in this district. 
(1)  Park models and recreational vehicles for living purposes. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  Agricultural industrial activities, leather tanning, wool processing, meat curing. 
(2)  Airport. 
(3)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(4)  Amphitheater. 
(5)  Animal hospital and boarding facility with indoor or outdoor facilities. 
(6)  Animal and poultry slaughter, stockyards, rendering. 
(7)  Animal sanctuary, zoo. 
(8)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(9)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(10)  Biofuel production, five thousand (5,000) to fifteen (15,000) gallons per day. 
(11)  Biofuel production, greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(12)  Campground. 
(13)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(14)  Cluster housing. (See section 3-9-67, cluster housing.) 
(15)  Composting facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(16)  Concentrated animal feeding operation. 
(17)  Correctional facility. 
(18)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable processing. 
(19)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(20)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(21)  Exotic animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(22)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(23)  Fertilizer manufacturing. 
(24)  Gas station. 
(25)  Government uses and facilities. 
(26)  Heliport, helistop. 
(27)  Livestock auction. 
(28)  Lumberyard. 
(29)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(30)  Motor sports track, venue. 
(31)  Outdoor market space or exhibition space. 
(32)  Pistol, rifle, skeet, trap shooting and archery ranges. 
(33)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(34)  Power plant. 
(35)  Private clubs. 
(36)  Private landing field. 
(37)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(38)  Sawmill, machine shop. 
(39)  Single-family residences used as a foster care facilities. 
(40)  Solid waste combustor. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(41)  Solid waste disposal facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(42)  Transfer station. (See section 3-9-71, debris and waste facilities.) 
(43)  University or college. 
(44)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
The excavation and mining (EM) zoning district may not be established anywhere on barrier islands, or within one (1) statute mile of the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, any intercoastal waterways, or the waters of Charlotte Harbor and the Peace River located west of the I-75 Interstate Highway bridge over the Peace River. The EM zoning district is intended to be applied only to those properties accommodating excavations that meet group III criteria contained in the Charlotte County Excavation and Earthmoving Code. 
(h)  Signs. Signage shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85, as well as chapter 3-5, article XXIII. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-050, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-32. - Residential estate (RE). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow low-density, large-lot residential and related uses. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): The following uses and structures are permitted in this district: 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Community garden. 
(3)  Emergency services. 
(4)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(5)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations) 
(6)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(7)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(8)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(9)  Single-family detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(10)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports and sheds. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet but no greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area, must be DBPR approved or otherwise meet the Florida Building Code. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
b.  Detached accessory structures, greater than four hundred (400) square feet but no greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area allowed with wall or leg heights no more than twelve (12) feet tall as measured from the point of installation (grade level). Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
c.  Detached accessory structures, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be site built. Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
d.  The total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater, for a property less than one-half acre in size. If the property is one-half acre or more in size the total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
e.  If the structure is accessory to a multi-story primary structure, the sidewall heights shall be allowed to be the same as those of the primary structure with no requirements to increase the setbacks. 
f.  Detached accessory structures in RE-1 shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence, except garages and carports, which must still maintain required setbacks. 
g.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(3)  Fences or walls, which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Greenhouses and other horticultural uses provided no retail sales are made on the premises. 
(5)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permittee in a guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(6)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(7)  Swimming pools, tennis court or other similar non-commercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  4H, FFA, and similar uses and activities. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(3)  Clubhouse. 
(4)  Cluster housing. (See section 3-9-67, cluster housing.) 
(5)  Domestic animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(6)  Guest home. 
(7)  Horse stable. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district, including manufactured homes. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Animal sanctuary, zoo. 
(3)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(4)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(5)  Cemetery, mausoleum. 
(6)  Day care center, child. 
(7)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(8)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(9)  Fish and wildlife management area, nature preserve. 
(10)  Government uses and facilities. 
(11)  Livestock breeding, boarding, training, and grazing. 
(12)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(13)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(14)  Plant nursery. 
(15)  Private clubs. 
(16)  Private landing field. 
(17)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(18)  University or college. 
(19)  Yacht clubs, country clubs, and other recreational amenities, including but not limited to tennis courts, basketball courts, and golf courses located on a separate parcel. 
(20)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-052, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-33. - Residential single-family (RSF). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of these districts is to provide for single-family residential dwellings and other uses normally associated therewith. Among RSF-2, RSF-3.5 and RSF-5 districts, there are variations in requirements for lot area, width, and certain yards. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Emergency services. 
(3)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(4)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-75, home occupations.) 
(5)  Model home. (See section 3-9-79, model homes.) 
(6)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(7)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(8)  Single-family detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(9)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-69, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports and sheds. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet but no greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area, must be DBPR approved oi otherwise meet the Florida Building Code. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
b.  Detached accessory structures, greater than four hundred (400) square feet but no greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area allowed with wall or leg heights no more than twelve (12) feet tall as measured from the point of installation (grade level). Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure, if an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
c.  Detached accessory structures, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be site built and constructed of the same materials as the primary structure. Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. Colors must match those of the primary structure. 
d.  The total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater, for a property less than one-half acre in size. If the property is one-half (½) acre or more in size, the total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
e.  If the structure is accessory to a multi-story primary structure, the sidewall heights shall be allowed to be the same as those of the primary structure with no requirements to increase the setbacks. 
f.  Detached accessory structures shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence except garages and carports, which must still maintain required setbacks. 
g.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(3)  Fences or walls, which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Greenhouses and other horticultural uses, provided no retail sales are made on the premises. 
(5)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permittee in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(6)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(7)  Swimming pools, tennis court or other similar non-commercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(2)  Clubhouse. 
(3)  Cluster housing. (See section 3-9-67, cluster housing.) 
(4)  Guest home. 
(5)  Subdivided lots with fifty-foot wide frontage and five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(6)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(7)  Accessory chicken keeping. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, commercial parking lots and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by special exception, shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(4)  Cemetery, mausoleum. 
(5)  Community garden. 
(6)  Day care center, child. 
(7)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(8)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(9)  Government uses and facilities. 
(10)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(11)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(12)  Private clubs. 
(13)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(14)  University or college. 
(15)  Yacht clubs, country clubs, and other recreational amenities, including but not limited to tennis courts, basketball courts, and golf courses located on a separate parcel. 
(16)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same shall be amended. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-053, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-054, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18; Ord. No. 2020-041, § 1(Exh. B), 10-27-20) 
Sec. 3-9-34. - Residential multifamily (RMF). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to offer low- or high-density residential with emphasis on multifamily use. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Duplex or triplex. 
(3)  Emergency services. 
(4)  Cluster housing. (See section 3-9-67, cluster housing.) 
(5)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(6)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(7)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(8)  Multifamily. 
(9)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(10)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(11)  Single-family detached or attached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(12)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports and sheds. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet but no greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area, must be DBPR approved or otherwise meet the Florida Building Code. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
b.  Detached accessory structures, greater than four hundred (400) square feet but no greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area allowed with wall or leg heights no more than twelve (12) feet tall as measured from the point of installation (grade level). Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
c.  Detached accessory structures, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be site built and constructed of the same materials as the primary structure. Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. Colors must match those of the primary structure. 
d.  The total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater for a property less than one-half (½) acre in size. If the property is one-half (½) acre or more in size, the total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
e.  If the structure is accessory to a multi-story primary structure, the sidewall heights shall be allowed to be the same as those of the primary structure with no requirements to increase the setbacks. 
f.  Detached accessory structures shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence except garages and carports, which must still maintain required setbacks. 
g.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps 
(3)  Clubhouse, community center on the same parcel as the residential development or within the same residential development. 
(4)  Fences or walls, which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(5)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(6)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(7}  Swimming pools, tennis court or other similar non-commercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(3)  Boarding, rooming house. 
(4)  Clubhouse. 
(5)  Nursing home. 
(6)  Transitional/halfway housing. 
(7)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district, including mobile homes and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by special exception. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(3)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(4)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(5)  Government uses and facilities. 
(6)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(7)  Place of worship. (See section 3-7-82, places of worship.) 
(8)  Private clubs. 
(9)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(10)  University or college. 
(11)  Yacht clubs, country clubs, and other recreational amenities. 
(12)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
* Half the building height but not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same shall be amended. 
If the RMF district abuts a single-family district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended, shall be erected closer to the abutting single-family zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-054, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-054, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-35. - Residential multifamily tourist (RMF-T). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to permit multifamily dwellings and tourist-related commercial facilities. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(4)  Duplex or triplex. 
(5)  Emergency services. 
(6)  Hotel, motel, inn. 
(7)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(8)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(9)  Multifamily. 
(10)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(11)  Personal services. 
(12)  Single-family attached or detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(13)  Specialty shops. 
(14)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports and sheds. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet but no greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area, must be DBPR approved or otherwise meet the Florida Building Code. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
b.  Detached accessory structures, greater than four hundred (400) square feet but no greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area allowed with wall or leg heights no more than twelve (12) feet tall as measured from the point of installation (grade level). Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
c.  Detached accessory structures, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be site built and constructed of the same materials as the primary structure. Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. Colors must match those of the primary structure. 
d.  The total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater for a property less than one-half (½) acre in size. If the property is one-half (½) acre or more in size, the total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
e.  If the structure is accessory to a multi-story primary structure, the sidewall heights shall be allowed to be the same as those of the primary structure with no requirements to increase the setbacks. 
f.  Detached accessory structures shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence except garages and carports, which must still maintain required setbacks. 
g.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(3)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(5)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(6)  Swimming pools, tennis court or other similar non-commercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional use and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Boarding, rooming house. 
(3)  Clubhouse. 
(4)  Marina. 
(5)  Nursing home. 
(6)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(3)  Campground. 
(4)  Clubhouse. 
(5)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(6)  General retail sales and services. 
(7)  Government uses and facilities. 
(8)  Leisure vehicle rental. 
(9)  Liquor, package store. 
(10)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(11)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(12)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(13)  Private clubs. 
(14)  Recreation, indoor. 
(15)  Recreational vehicle use. 
(16)  Restaurant. 
(17)  Yacht clubs, country clubs, and other recreational amenities. 
(18)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same shall be amended. 
If the RMF-T district abuts a single-family district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting single-family zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-055, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-054, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-36. - Manufactured home park (MHP). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow parks consisting of manufactured homes occupied as single-family detached dwelling units. The park may be platted or nonplatted. Site plan approval is required for all new mobile home parks and the expansion or modification of existing parks. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. 
(2)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(3)  Park offices and maintenance facilities. 
(4)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(5)  Park recreational facilities. 
(6)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures; are located on the same lot or parcel as the mobile home park; are not likely to attract visitors in large numbers; and involve operations or structures consistent with the character of a mobile home park, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Accessory structures designed to meet Florida Building Code may be placed adjacent (not attached) to primary structures. These accessory structures shall be structurally independent, self-supporting and free standing. These structures must also meet the fire code. Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Additions to manufactured homes (HUD), adjacent to and attached to manufactured homes. 
(3)  Enclosed storage structures and garage facilities with use limited to park management and its residents. 
(4)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding and training. 
(5)  Laundry facilities and sales of groceries and sundries, subject to the following: 
a.  Such establishments and parking areas related primarily to their operations shall not occupy more than two (2) percent of the area of the park. 
b.  Such establishments shall be used primarily by occupants of the park. 
c.  The commercial nature of such establishments shall not be visible from any street outside the park so as to attract customers other than occupants of the park. 
d.  Such establishments shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from any public street and shall be accessible only from a street within the park. 
(6)  Open storage areas. This area may be used for open storage of items including but not limited to mobile homes, recreational vehicles, boats, and recreational equipment, the use of which is limited to park residents. No such areas shall exceed five (5) percent of the total park area. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional uses or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Clubhouse. 
(2)  Recreational vehicle use. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(4)  Community garden. 
(5)  Emergency services. 
(6)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(7)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(8)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(9)  Place of worship. (See section 3-7-82, places of worship.) 
(10)  Private clubs. 
(11)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
(1)  Street improvements. Streets within the proposed manufactured home park may be public if platted and accepted by the county. Any necessary developer-funded improvements to the existing right-of-way will not receive any impact fee credits. 
(2)  Recreational areas. A minimum of five (5) percent of the gross land area within park boundaries shall be used as a park and/or recreation area. No more than ten (10) percent of the stormwater lake may be used for the required recreation area otherwise determined by state or federal agencies. 
(3)  Water and sewer. Each lot shall be serviced by a central water and sewer system. The location of any water or sewer plants within the boundaries of the mobile home park shall be designed, located, landscaped and buffered so as not to be visible from adjacent properties. 
(4)  Emergency shelters. Emergency shelters shall be required to be built to meet the standards set forth in the Florida Building Code. 
(5)  Fire protection. All parks shall have an appropriate fire protection plan and appropriate base facilities for fighting fire as approved by Charlotte County Fire/EMS. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85, sign code. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(j)  Landscaping and buffering. Landscaping and buffering shall be in accordance with chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers. 
(k)  Tree removal and preservation. Tree removal/preservation shall be in accordance with chapter 3-2, article IX, tree requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2014-056, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-37. - Manufactured home conventional (MHC). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow manufactured homes and single-family detached dwelling units and related uses on individual platted lots. 
(b)  Permitted uses and structures (P): 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Emergency services. 
(3)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. 
(4)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(5)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(6)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(7)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(8)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(9)  Single-family detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(10)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, garages, carports and sheds. 
a.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet but no greater than four hundred (400) square feet in area, must be DBPR approved or otherwise meet the Florida Building Code. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
b.  Detached accessory structures, greater than four hundred (400) square feet but no greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in area allowed with wall or leg heights no more than twelve (12) feet tall as measured from the point of installation (grade level). Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. These structures are allowed with metal siding in the same color as the primary structure. If an exact color match is not possible a complimentary and not contrasting color may be allowed. 
c.  Detached accessory structures, greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet must be site built and constructed of the same materials as the primary structure. Any increase in wall or leg height greater than twelve (12) feet may be allowed with an increase of required setbacks (all sides) of five (5) feet for every one (1) foot of height increase. All roofs must be pitched and include overhangs and eaves which meet current building codes. Rounded corners are prohibited. Colors must match those of the primary structure. 
d.  The total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater for a property less than one-half (½) acre in size. If the property is one-half (½) acre or more in size, the total area of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner(s) may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
e.  If the structure is accessory to a multi-story primary structure, the sidewall heights shall be allowed to be the same as those of the primary structure with no requirements to increase the setbacks. 
f.  Detached accessory structures shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence except garages and carports, but which must still maintain required setbacks. 
g.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(2)  Non-commercial boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(3)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Greenhouses and other horticultural uses, provided no retail sales are made on the premises. 
(5)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(6)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(7)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses and structures (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(2)  Clubhouse. 
(3)  Guest home. 
(4)  Subdivided lots with fifty-foot wide frontage and five thousand (5,000) square foot lot. 
(5)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district, including but not limited to: 
(1)  ANSI park models and park models. 
(2)  Travel trailers and motor homes used for residential purposes. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(5)  Community garden. 
(6)  Day care center, child. 
(7)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(8)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(9)  Government uses and facilities. 
(10)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(11)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(12)  Private clubs. 
(13)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-057, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-054, § 1, 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-057, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former § 3-9-37 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3-9-37 pertained to mobile home conventional (MHC) and derived from minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 7; Res. No. 87-78, §§ 17, 18, adopted May 19, 1987; Ord. No. 89-34, § 11, adopted May 31, 1989; Ord. No. 94-57, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 2001-031, § 1(g), adopted June 12, 2001; and Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2002. 
Sec. 3-9-38. - Recreational vehicle park (RVP). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow transient living in recreational vehicles and campgrounds. It is the further intent of this Code that the individual living sites may be subdivided for individual ownership and the park must be retained in a form of common or single ownership. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Management offices and maintenance facilities. 
(2)  Manager's residence (a manufactured home may be allowed for manager's residence only). 
(3)  Park recreational facilities. 
(4)  Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, camping tents and trailers occupied as temporary dwelling units. 
(5)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures permitted if they: 
(1)  Are customarily accessory to permitted uses and structures. 
(2)  Involve operations of a recreational vehicle park, including the following: 
a.  Laundry facilities, sale of groceries and sundries, sale of LP (liquefied petroleum) gas, all of which are subject to the following: 
1.  Such establishments and the associated parking areas related primarily to their operations shall not occupy more than two (2) percent of the area of the park. 
2.  The commercial nature of such establishment shall not be visible from any street outside the park so as to attract customers other than the occupants of the park. 
3.  Such establishment shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any public street and shall be accessible only from a street within the park. 
b.  Enclosed storage structures and garage facilities located on a designated common area with the use to be limited to the park management and the residents. 
c.  Detached and freestanding screen rooms and casitas provided that such structures are totally independent from the recreational vehicle and shall be constructed and located in such a manner as not to impede the immediate removal of any recreational vehicle from its designated site. 
d.  Storage structures not exceeding fifty (50) square feet may be allowed provided that they are detached and located as an improvement on all recreational vehicle lots. The location and size of the storage structures shall be uniform and the same on all lots. 
e.  Concrete slabs, decks, and patios provided such structures are detached and structurally independent from the accompanying recreational vehicles and in no way impede the immediate removal of recreational vehicles from the site. 
f.  Open storage areas for recreational equipment and vehicles, the use of which is limited to the park residents, provided that the area is designated on the approved development plan for the recreational vehicle park and that no such area shall exceed five (5) percent of the total park area. 
(3)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(d)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Any recreational vehicle and park model in excess of four hundred (400) square feet in area. 
(2)  Screen rooms and/or cabanas attached to recreational vehicles, including any form of rigid awnings which are not designed for transportation down the highway. 
(3)  Year-round occupation of a recreational vehicle. 
(e)  Special exceptions: (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Emergency services. 
(3)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(4)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(f)  Development standards: 

 
a. No structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be located closer than 35 feet to any park boundary abutting a public road nor closer than twenty-five (25) feet to an exterior park boundary. 
b. No structure or recreational vehicle shall be located closer than five (5) feet to the side and rear property line and ten (10) feet to the pavement line of any internal street excluding driveways and patio slabs which are not in excess of six (6) inches above the existing finished grade of the recreational vehicle site. 
(1)  Occupancy time limit: The occupancy of any individual living site by any individual or group of individuals shall be strictly limited to one hundred eighty (180) days and no individual or group of individuals may reestablish occupancy of any individual living site until at least thirty (30) days following their departure. The county reserves the right to inspect occupancy records of the park to ensure enforcement of this condition. 
(2)  Site access: Parks shall not have access through local, residential roadways unless a traffic study submitted to and approved by the county determines that the use of the roads by the proposed park does not create a traffic safety hazard. Any necessary developer-funded improvements to the existing rights-of-way will not receive any impact fee credits. 
(3)  Street improvements: Streets within the recreational vehicle park may be public if platted and accepted by the county. Any necessary developer-funded improvements to the existing right-of-way will not receive any impact fee credit. 
(4)  Recreational areas and open space areas: A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the land area within park boundaries shall be developed as recreation and open space areas, which may include but not be limited to passive recreational trails, central community clubhouse facilities, pools, and tennis courts. If any portion of a lake or waterway contained within the boundaries of a recreational vehicle park is proposed to be used for a portion of the recreational area, only that portion which supports active recreation shall be counted. No more than ten (10) percent of the stormwater lake may be used for the required recreation area otherwise determined by state or federal agencies. 
(5)  Water and sewer. Each site shall be serviced by a central water and sewer system. The location of any water or sewer plants within the boundaries of the recreational vehicle park shall be designed, located, landscaped and buffered so as not to be visible from adjacent properties. If recreational vehicle sites are to be provided to recreational vehicles that have no bath or toilet facilities, then those sites shall be located not more than two hundred (200) feet from approved shower and toilet facilities. 
(6)  Fire protection: All recreational vehicle parks shall have an appropriate fire protection plan and appropriate base facilities for fighting fire as approved by Charlotte County Fire/EMS. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(h)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Res. No. 85-313, § 1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 89-34, § 12, 5-31-89; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ 20—22, 11-3-94; Ord. No. 2001-031, § 1(h), (i), 6-12-01; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2014-058, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— These provisions were formerly found in § 3-9-46. The provisions of former § 3-9-38 are now found in § 3-9-42. 
Sec. 3-9-39. - Office medical institutional (OMI). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow professional and business offices, as well as institutional and cultural activities. Although this district may allow both residential and nonresidential uses, it is not a mixed-use district, and it is the further intent of this district that individual lots be developed with a single use. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Bank, financial services. 
(4)  Business services. 
(5)  Day care center, child. 
(6)  Drug store, pharmacy. 
(7)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(8)  Emergency services. 
(9)  General offices. 
(10)  Government uses and facilities. 
(11)  Homeless shelter. 
(12)  Hospital. 
(13)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(14)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(15)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(16)  Nursing home. 
(17)  Pain management clinic. (See section 3-9-80, pain management clinics.) 
(18)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(19)  Personal services. 
(20)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(21)  Professional services. 
(22)  Sanitariums. 
(23)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(24)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(25)  University or college. 
(26)  Vocational, trade, or business school. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Non-commercial Boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(2)  Fences or walls may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(3)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(4)  For single-family residential uses located in the OMI zoning district the permitted accessory uses and structures shall be the same as those in the RSF zoning district. 
(5)  For multifamily residential uses located in the OMI zoning district the permitted accessory uses and structures shall be the same as those in the RMF zoning district. 
(6)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional use (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Animal hospital, boarding facility. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Detox center and substance abuse center. 
(4)  Duplex or triplex. 
(5)  Laboratories, class 1, 2, 3. 
(6)  Manufactured home (DCA), minimum requirement is one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour exposure C. 
(7)  Multifamily. 
(8)  Private off-site parking. 
(9)  Single-family attached or detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(10)  Transitional/halfway housing. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(3)  Heliport, helistop. 
(4)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupation.) 
(5)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(6)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals (BZA) shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. It is expressly intended by these regulations that any use permitted as a principal use or by special exception in another zoning district or districts which is not specially listed in this section is excluded by its omission and cannot be a special exception considered or approved by the BZA as one (1) permitted by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
If an OMI district abuts a residential district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting residentially zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-060, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-060, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed § 3-9-39, which pertained to office, medical and institutional (OMI) and derived from minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 7; Res. No. 87-78, § 19, adopted May 19, 1987; Res. No. 87-254, § 21, adopted Oct. 28, 1987; Ord. No. 89-34, § 13, adopted May 31, 1989; Ord. No. 91-08, §§ 1—3, adopted Feb. 26, 1991; Ord. No. 91-51, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 1991; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ 23—25, adopted Nov. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 2001-031, § 1(j), adopted June 12, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; and Ord. No. 2011-030, § 2, adopted July 26, 2011. 
Sec. 3-9-40. - Commercial neighborhood (CN). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow small-scale commercial uses within or adjacent to residential neighborhoods in order to encourage pedestrian activity and reduce the number and length of automobile trips, as well as provide increased convenience to all users. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(2)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(3)  Bank, financial services. 
(4)  Business services. 
(5)  Day care center, child. 
(6)  Drug store, pharmacy. 
(7)  Dry cleaner. 
(8)  Emergency services. 
(9)  General offices. 
(10)  General retail sales and services. (See section 3-9-61, accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage.) 
(11)  Laundromat. 
(12)  Liquor, package store. 
(13)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(14)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(15)  Personal services. 
(16)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(17)  Post office. 
(18)  Professional services. 
(19)  Restaurant. 
(20)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are also permitted in this district, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional use (C) and structures: (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Animal hospital and boarding facility. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or by special exception, including the outside storage or display of merchandise, shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(3)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(4)  Gas station. 
(5)  Government uses and facilities. 
(6)  Outdoor market or exhibition space. 
(7)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(8)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Site plan approval pursuant to section 3-9-7 is required prior to all development in this district. Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. If the CN district abuts a residential district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting residentially zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(i)  Lighting. Maximum height of lighting fixtures shall be fifteen (15) feet, arranged so that no direct source of light is visible from any residentially zoned property. 
(j)  Utility areas. Utility areas, including trash receptacles, shall be completely screened from the view of customers and adjacent property owners and shall be located in the rear yard in case of interior lots and in the side yard in case of corner lots. 
(k)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(Ord. No. 2014-061, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-41. - Commercial tourist (CT). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow tourist-related facilities near or adjacent to tourist attractions such as Gulf beach frontage, theme parks, major public or private parks, and other recreational or scenic resources. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Animal hospital, boarding facility. 
(2)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(3)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(4)  Auditorium, convention center, performing arts center. 
(5)  Bank, financial services. 
(6)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(8)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(9)  Business services. 
(10)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(11)  Drug store, pharmacy. 
(12)  Emergency services. 
(13)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(14)  Gas station. 
(15)  General offices. 
(16)  General retail sales and services. (See section 3-9-61, accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage.) 
(17)  Golf course. 
(18)  Government uses and facilities. 
(19)  Hotel, motel, inn. 
(20)  Laundromat. 
(21)  Liquor, package store. 
(22)  Marina. 
(23)  Minor home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(24)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(25)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(26)  Personal services. 
(27)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(28)  Private clubs. 
(29)  Professional services. 
(30)  Recreation, indoor. 
(31)  Restaurant. 
(32)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures, including approved conditional or special exception uses, are permitted in this district, including a residential dwelling unit within the same structure as the principal use for occupancy by owners or employees of permitted uses, and also including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
(2)  Clubhouse, community center on the same parcel as the residential development or within the same residential development. 
(3)  Fences or walls may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(4)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar recreational uses and structures. 
(5)  For single-family residential uses located in the CT zoning district the permitted accessory uses and structures shall be the same as those in the RSF zoning district. 
(6)  For multifamily residential uses located in the CT zoning district the permitted accessory uses and structures shall be the same as those in the RMF zoning district. 
(d)  Conditional use (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Duplex or triplex. 
(3)  Multifamily. 
(4)  Private off-site parking. 
(5)  Single-family attached or detached, which may have a guest suite that is structurally attached, with or without cooking facilities. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted as a conditional use or by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Amphitheater. 
(3)  Leisure vehicle rental. 
(4)  Major home occupation. (See section 3-9-74, home occupations.) 
(5)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(6)  Noncommercial vehicle rental. 
(7)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(8)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(9)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: For multifamily principal uses, development standards are the same as in RMF-15 districts, except on bridgeless barrier islands, which must be in accordance with section 3-9-66, bridgeless barrier islands. 
Accessory buildings, same as principal building. 

 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. 
If the CT district abuts a residential district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting residentially zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-062, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-027, § 1(Exh. A), 9-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-42. - Commercial general (CG). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow general commercial activity. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Animal hospital, boarding facility. 
(2)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(3)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(4)  Auditorium, convention center, performing arts center. 
(5)  Bank, financial services. 
(6)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(7)  Business services. 
(8)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(9)  Day care center, child. 
(10)  Drug store, pharmacy. 
(11)  Dry cleaner. 
(12)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(13)  Emergency services. 
(14)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(15)  Funeral homes, crematoria. 
(16)  Gas station. 
(17)  General offices. 
(18)  General retail sales and services. (See section 3-9-61, accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage. 
(19)  Government uses and facilities. 
(20)  Homeless shelter. 
(21)  Hospital. 
(22)  Hotel, motel, inn. 
(23)  Laundromat. 
(24)  Liquor, package store. 
(25)  Mass transit station. 
(26)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(27)  Mini-warehouses or storage facilities, but not bulk storage of flammable liquids. 
(28)  Model home. (See section 3-9-78, model homes.) 
(29)  Motor vehicle wash. 
(30)  Nursing home. 
(31)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(32)  Park, public or not-for-profit. 
(33)  Personal services. 
(34)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(35)  Post office. 
(36)  Printing facilities. 
(37)  Private club. 
(38)  Professional services. 
(39)  Recreation, indoor. 
(40)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(41)  Restaurant. 
(42)  Sexually oriented business. (See section 3-9-84, sexually oriented businesses.) 
(43)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(44)  University or college. 
(45)  Vocational, trade, or business school. 
(46)  Wholesale sales. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are also permitted in this district, including a residential dwelling unit within the same structure as the principal use for occupancy by owners or employees of permitted uses, and also including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Fences or walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(d)  Conditional uses (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more. (See section 3-9-62, assisted living facility.) 
(2)  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle sales, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(3)  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle repair, services, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(4)  Building trades contractor's office. 
(3)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(4)  Laboratories, class 1, 2, 3. 
(5)  Marina. 
(6)  Noncommercial vehicle rental. 
(7)  Private off-site parking. 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not expressly, or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions) 
(1)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(2)  Amphitheater. 
(3)  Animal sanctuary, zoo. 
(4)  Biofuel production, less than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. 
(5)  Building trades contractor's office with storage yard on-premises, or with more than ten (10) service vehicles and with heavy equipment. 
(6)  Commercial laundry. 
(7)  Commercial vehicle rental. 
(8)  Heavy machinery, equipment rental, sales, service. 
(9)  Heliport, helistop. 
(10)  Industrial marina. 
(11)  Leisure vehicle rental. 
(12)  Light manufacturing and assembly in a completely enclosed building. 
(13)  Lumberyard. 
(14)  Outdoor market or exhibition space. 
(15)  Railroad sidings. 
(16)  Storage of boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(17)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(18)  Truck stop. 
(19)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-063, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-063, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former § 3-9-42, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 3-9-42 pertained to Commercial, general (CG) and derived from Minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 7; Res. No. 83-11, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1983; Res. No. 83-18, § 1, adopted March 22, 1983; Res. No. 85-105, § 1, adopted June 11, 1985; Res. No. 87-254, § 22, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Res. No. 87-255, § 6, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Res. No. 87-258, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 20, 1987; Ord. No. 89-34, § 16, adopted May 31, 1989; Ord. No. 92-44, §§ 1—3, adopted June 2, 1992; Ord. No. 94-55, §§ 28, 29, adopted Nov. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 2001-031, § 1(m), adopted June 12, 2001; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 1, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; and Ord. No. 2003-061, § 8, adopted Aug. 26, 2003. 
Sec. 3-9-43. - Industrial general (IG). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow various light industrial and higher-intensity commercial uses. All industrial processes shall take place within completely enclosed buildings unless approved by a special exception. Storage of materials and finished products may be permitted within an enclosed yard with appropriate screens and buffering. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  Biofuel production, less than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. 
(2)  Biofuel production, five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(3)  Boat, travel trailer, and motor vehicle sales, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(4)  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle repair, services, and storage, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(5)  Building trades contractor's office with storage yard on-premises and heavy equipment. 
(6)  Commercial laundry. 
(7)  Commercial vehicle rental. 
(8)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable processing. 
(9)  Distribution center, wholesaling, warehousing. 
(10)  Dry cleaner. 
(11)  Emergency services. 
(12)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(13)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(14)  Gas station. 
(15)  Government uses and facilities. 
(16)  Heavy machinery, equipment rental, sales, service. 
(17)  Heliport, helistop. 
(18)  Industrial marina. 
(19)  Light manufacturing and assembly in a completely enclosed building. 
(20)  Lumberyard. 
(21)  Mass transit station. 
(22)  Motor vehicle wash. 
(23)  Nonretail food production. 
(24)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(25)  Printing, lithographing, publishing, and similar establishments. 
(26)  Research, testing facility. 
(27)  Sales and storage of mobile homes. 
(28)  Sawmill, machine shop. 
(29)  Sexually oriented business. (See section 3-9-84, sexually oriented businesses.) 
(30)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(31)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(32)  Truck stop. 
(33)  Vocational, trade, or business school. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses, including retail sales, and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted and conditional uses and structures are also permitted in this district; however, no residential facilities shall be permitted in the district except for watchmen or caretakers whose work requires residence on the premises. 
(d)  Conditional use (C) and structures: (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Laboratories, class 1, 2, 3. 
(2)  Mini transfer station. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(3)  Minor yard trash processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(4)  Outdoor storage yard. 
(5)  Private off-site parking. 
(6)  Recovered materials processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(7)  Residential household hazardous waste collection center. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(8)  Waste tire collection center. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any use or structure not specifically or by reasonable implication permitted herein, or permitted by special exception, shall be unlawful in this district, including the following: 
(1)  Animal slaughterhouses. 
(2)  Any use not conforming to industrial performance standards. 
(3)  Chemical and fertilizer manufacturing. 
(4)  Explosives manufacturing. 
(5)  Hospitals and clinics, except clinics in connection with industrial activity. 
(6)  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
(7)  Petroleum refining. 
(8)  Place of worship. (See section 3-7-82, places of worship.) 
(9)  Residential dwellings, except as permitted under accessory uses. 
(10)  Stockyards and feeding pens. 
(11)  Tanneries with curing or storage of raw hides. 
(12)  Wrecking yards, including automotive vehicle wrecking yards and junkyards. 
(f)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  Airport. 
(2)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(3)  Biofuel production, greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(4)  Composting facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(5)  Flammable liquid storage. 
(6)  Light manufacturing and assembly not in a completely enclosed building. 
(7)  Materials recovery facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(8)  Transfer station. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(9)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
All uses shall conform to the industrial performance standards as set forth in section 3-9-75. 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, as the same may be amended. 
If the IG district abuts a residential district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting residentially zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-065, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-44. - Industrial intensive (II). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow various heavy industrial uses including those that produce noise, odors, noxious or toxic by-products, increased hazards of fire or explosion, or are generally incompatible with lower intensity land uses. Industrial processes are not required to take place within enclosed buildings. Work areas, and the storage of materials and finished products may be permitted within an enclosed yard with appropriate screens and buffering. 
(b)  Permitted uses (P) and structures: 
(1)  All other manufacturing uses not listed below. 
(2)  Asphalt plant, concrete batch plant. 
(3)  Biofuel production, less than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day. 
(4)  Biofuel production, five thousand (5,000) to fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(5)  Biofuel production, greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) gallons per day. 
(6)  Boat, travel trailer, and motor vehicle sales, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(7)  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle repair, services, and storage, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
(8)  Building trades contractor's office with storage yard on-premises and heavy equipment. 
(9)  Commercial laundry. 
(10)  Commercial vehicle rental. 
(11)  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable processing. 
(12)  Distribution center, wholesaling, warehousing. 
(13)  Dry cleaner. 
(14)  Emergency services. 
(15)  Essential services. (See section 3-9-71, essential services.) 
(16)  Farm equipment sales and service. 
(17)  Flammable liquid storage. 
(18)  Gas station. 
(19)  Government uses and facilities. 
(20)  Heavy machinery, equipment rental, sales, service. 
(21)  Heliport, helistop. 
(22)  Industrial marina. 
(23)  Light manufacturing and assembly not in a completely enclosed building. 
(24)  Lumberyard. 
(25)  Mass transit station. 
(26)  Motor vehicle wash. 
(27)  Nonretail food production. 
(28)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(29)  Printing, lithographing, publishing and similar establishments. 
(30)  Research, testing facility. 
(31)  Sales and storage of mobile homes. 
(32)  Sawmill, machine shop. 
(33)  Sexually oriented business. (See section 3-9-84, sexually oriented businesses.) 
(34)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(35)  Telecommunications facility, greater than fifty (50) feet in height. (See section 3-9-68, communication towers.) 
(36)  Truck stop. 
(37)  Vocational, trade, or business school. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are also permitted in this district; however, no residential facility shall be permitted in the district except for watchmen or caretakers whose work requires residence on the premises. 
(d)  Conditional use (C): (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, conditional uses and structures.) 
(1)  Automobile wrecking and salvage yard. (See section 3-9-76, junklike conditions prohibited.) 
(2)  Laboratories, class 1, 2, 3. 
(3)  Mini transfer station. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(4)  Minor yard trash processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(5)  Outdoor storage yard. 
(6)  Private off-site parking. 
(7)  Recovered materials processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(8)  Residential household hazardous waste collection center. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(8)  Waste tire collection center. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(e)  Prohibited uses and structures: Any uses or structures not specifically or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception are prohibited in this district: 
(1)  Any use not conforming to industrial performance standards. 
(2)  Hospitals or clinics, except clinics in connection with industrial activity. 
(3)  Place of worship. (See section 3-9-82, places of worship.) 
(4)  Residential dwelling units, except as provided under accessory uses. 
(f)  Special exceptions: (For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions.) 
(1)  Agricultural industrial activities, leather tanning, wool processing, meat curing. 
(2)  Airport. 
(3)  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
(4)  Animal and poultry slaughter, stockyards, rendering. 
(5)  Composting facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(6)  Explosives manufacturing. 
(7)  Explosives storage. 
(8)  Fertilizer manufacturing. 
(9)  Materials recovery facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(10)  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
(11)  Petroleum refining. 
(12)  Soil treatment facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(13)  Solid waste combustor. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(14)  Solid waste disposal facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(15)  Transfer station. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(16)  Used oil processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(17)  Waste tire processing facility. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(18)  Waste tire site. (See section 3-9-70, debris and waste facilities.) 
(19)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals (BZA) shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6. board of zoning appeals. It is expressly intended by these regulations that any use permitted as a principal use or by special exception in another zoning district or districts which is not specifically listed in this section is excluded by its omission and cannot be a special exception considered or approved by the BZA as one (1) permitted by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
All uses shall conform to the industrial performance standards as set forth in section 3-9-75. 
Landscape buffers and screening shall be required in this district in accordance with the provisions of article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code as the same may be amended. 
If the II district abuts a residential district, no structure other than screening required pursuant to article XXII, chapter 3-5, of the Code, shall be erected closer to the abutting residentially zoned property than twenty-five (25) feet or the building height, whichever is greater. 
Where properties lie anywhere on a barrier island or within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek, structures must also be constructed in accordance with section 3-9-88, waterfront property. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(i)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(Ord. No. 2014-066, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-45. - Planned development (PD). 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to provide flexibility and to encourage concentrated, energy-efficient land development, and to provide opportunities to impose conditions to ensure that the proposed development is consistent and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. Conventional zoning requirements are replaced by flexible performance criteria intended to accomplish one (1) or more of the following goals: 
(1)  Provide for the planning, review and approval of one (1) or a combination of residential, office, commercial, and industrial land uses and structures which result in an organized, compatible development within and with surrounding land uses in regard to density and intensity of use. 
(2)  Allow a diversification of uses, structures and spaces compatible with existing or proposed uses and structures on surrounding properties, while promoting convenience in the location of related uses and amenities and to reduce vehicle miles traveled. 
(3)  Minimize infrastructure costs through a more efficient arrangement of structures, utilities, on-site circulation, and ingress and egress than is permitted under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations and promote open space. 
(4)  Encourage preservation of environmental assets and natural amenities as scenic and functional open-space areas. 
(5)  Encourage an increase in the amount and usability of open space by permitting a more concentrated building area than is allowed under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. 
(6)  Encourage imaginative and innovative site planning and land development concepts in order to create an aesthetically pleasing and walkable project. 
(7)  Promote development that is adapted to natural features, including wetlands, trees and other vegetation and habitat, and which avoids the disruption of natural drainage patterns. 
(8)  Encourage a mix of housing types. 
(9)  Implement the intent of the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan and the requirements set forth in the county's land development regulations, including, but not limited to, the TDU Ordinance. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Any residential, office, commercial, industrial, or public uses are permitted in this district, provided the proposed development is shown to be consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan, and the standards and criteria contained in this section. 
(c)  Design criteria and development standards. The following design criteria and development standards shall apply: 
(1)  Design criteria. 
a.  Generally. All non-residential development and multi-family projects with two (2) or more buildings shall have a cohesive design, including, but not limited to, heights, colors, materials, signs, and landscaping. Colors and materials shall comply with section 3-5-508, Building Materials and Colors, as may be amended. For all proposed developments, the location and arrangement of buildings and other facilities shall be compatible with existing uses in the general vicinity. Compatibility shall be ensured between the proposed, approved and existing uses in the vicinity of the PD and among different uses that may be proposed within the PD. 
b.  Natural features. The natural topography, soils and vegetation should be considered and utilized where economically and physically feasible through the careful location and design of structures, parking areas, recreation areas, open spaces, utilities, drainage and other facilities. 
c.  A PD shall generally comply with applicable design criteria and development standards set forth in chapter 3-9, Zoning, unless otherwise approved in the PD. 
(2)  Development standards. 
a.  Maximum density. The maximum density permitted within a PD shall be limited to the density indicated on the adopted future land use map for the underlying land use. 
b.  Grant of incentive density within urban service area (USA) and outside of coastal high hazard area. Incentive density may be granted if one (1) or more of the following are provided as part of the development: 

 
Incentive density may be granted as long as the county has adequate supply of incentive density units. Incentive density allocation to a specific project is valid for three (3) years and can be extended one (1) time by the board on the consent for additional two (2) years. 
A development agreement or other instrument(s) may be required as a condition of approval for the PD to ensure that improvements proposed as the basis for incentive density will be developed. Incentive density will be reserved for a subject property(ies) at the time of a PD rezoning approval and will be allocated at the PD final detail site plan approval only when all adopted PD conditions related to incentive density are met. 
c.  Cumulative incentive density. Except for item 6 above, in no event shall the cumulative density granted exceed thirty (30) percent of the density for the proposed residential development and shall be within the density permitted under the underlying land use in the Comprehensive Plan. 
d.  Minimum lot and yard requirements. Internal lot and yard requirements shall be established through the PD rezoning process. Unless otherwise approved by the BCC or provided in section 3-9-45.1, no structure shall be located closer to the peripheral property line of the PD than twenty-five (25) feet or as required by section 3-9-88, "Waterfront property," as the same may be amended, whichever is greater. 
e.  Maximum height of structures. The maximum height for structures shall be established through the PD rezoning process. 
f.  Open space. Unless otherwise approved by the BCC or as provided in section 3-9-45.1, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the entire PD parcel or phase shall be retained as open space. 
g.  Internal circulation. All streets shall be designed to provide safe, efficient and convenient access to land uses within the development and to roadways adjacent to the development. In addition to vehicular thoroughfares, functional pedestrian and bicycle-path systems are required in accordance with the county's land development regulations. 
h.  Utilities. PDs shall be served by public water and sanitary sewers, storm and surface drainage systems, and other applicable utilities systems. The preceding sentence shall not apply if the developer: 
1.  Provides private facilities, utilities or services approved by appropriate public agencies as substantially similar to public services which would otherwise be provided to the development under conventional zoning; and 
2.  Makes provision for their continued operation thereafter, or until public facilities, utilities and services are available for use. 
i.  Modification of development standards. 
1.  In PD concept plan review pursuant to section 3-9-45(d)(3)c.3., the board of county commissioners (BCC) may allow a modification of the standards of section 3-9-45 upon an applicant showing that the modification is necessary and will achieve creative, compatible and site-sensitive design. The applicant must demonstrate that measures for mitigating potential adverse impacts have been taken and the proposed alternative standard is at least equivalent to that required by the existing conventional zoning. 
2.  In its PD concept plan review pursuant to section 3-9-45(d)(4)b.3., the BCC may allow modification of the height limitations of 3-9-88 regarding waterfront property, based on the applicant showings described in i.1, above, as follows: height may be modified up to a maximum of sixty-five (65) feet, provided that a corresponding amount of additional outdoor open space, beyond that required by existing law, is created at the ground level to offset by a one-to-one ratio the additional cumulative square footage of all floors over thirty-five (35) feet high. For example, if twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of space above thirty-five (35) feet is allowed, an additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of open space shall be provided on the ground. 
(i)  The PD application shall identify all requests for additional height above thirty-five (35) feet, the square footage of each floor which will exceed thirty-five (35) feet, and identify and tabulate additional open space provided in return for any such increase in height. Pavers and green roofs shall not count towards open space. 
(ii)  In order to allow public input early in the concept review process, prior to the scheduling of the concept plan review before the site plan review(SPR), the applicant for any proposed PD seeking to modify height above the thirty-five-foot limit will hold a neighborhood public meeting with notice given to any property owner within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed PD as to the height to be added and the open space to be provided in mitigation thereof. The applicant shall provide a summary of the neighborhood meeting, including, but not limited to, date, time and place of meeting; number of attendees; and copies of any documents provided to the public. 
3.  All modifications pursuant to this section must be clearly described within the applicant's petition narrative and the staff report and clearly articulated as part of the presentation to the BCC. The BCC will consider each modification request and approve, deny or approve with conditions, or continue the application in order to receive additional information and review from staff and/or the applicant. 
4.  No modification pursuant to this section shall be made to or for any development on property located on a key, a barrier island or within the Manasota Key overlay district. 
5.  Request for modifications from previously approved plans shall be initiated by submitting an application for modification. Minor modifications may be approved by the zoning official. Any modification of mitigation measures provided pursuant to subsection j.1 or j.2 above shall always be considered a major modification. 
6.  Requests to allow modifications to permitted uses under section 3-9-47, Charlotte Harbor Community Development Regulations, as may be amended, is prohibited. 
(d)  Procedures for rezoning to PD. 
(1)  Approval process for planned developments. The approval process for a PD shall be divided into two phases: PD rezoning (a. or b. below) and final detail site plan approval (c. and d. below). 
a.  PD Rezoning with a general PD concept plan. A general PD concept plan shall contain development standards including, but not limited to, the proposed uses, density and intensity, setbacks and building heights requirements, proposed access point(s), and major internal traffic circulation. 
1.  Preapplication conference with appropriate county staff. 
2.  Site plan review (SPR). 
3.  Planning and zoning board (P&Z board), public hearing. 
4.  BCC, public hearing. 
b.  PD rezoning with a detail PD concept plan. A detail PD concept plan shall include the development standards requirements for a general PD concept plan and meet design criteria set forth in (c)(1) above and development standards set forth in (c)(2) above, and in addition a landscaping plan, signage plan if the applicant proposes to deviate from section 3-9-85, Signs, and for non-residential developments and multi-family development with two (2) or more buildings, elevations and building details, such as materials and colors, are required. These design elements will be approved in concept by the BCC and final approval will occur during a final site plan review by staff. 
1.  Preapplication conference with appropriate county staff. 
2.  SPR. 
3.  P&Z board, public hearing. 
4.  BCC, public hearing. 
c.  Final detail site plan approval after PD rezoning with a general PD concept plan approval. 
1.  SPR. 
2.  BCC, consent agenda. 
d.  Final detail site plan approval after PD rezoning with a detail PD concept plan approval. 
1.  SPR. 
(2)  Preapplication conference. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss with county staff early and informally the purpose and intent of the proposed planned development project, and the criteria and standards which may apply. It will also familiarize the applicant with the objectives and policies of applicable elements of the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Procedure. Unless waived by the zoning official, the applicant shall meet with the appropriate county staff prior to formally submitting a request for a PD. The zoning official shall schedule the meeting to be held within fifteen (15) working days of the applicant's request for such meeting. 
c.  Requirements. The applicant shall prepare for the preapplication conference a generalized sketch plan for the proposed development which shall include preliminary data regarding proposed land use, intensity of use, residential density, lot coverage, project amenities, natural resources, stormwater retention and disposal, sewage treatment, and potable water supply. 
(3)  PD rezoning. 
a.  The purpose of PD rezoning is to approve the density and intensity of land use and to establish appropriate conditions, including deviation of land development regulations, prior to final detail site plan review. 
PD rezoning approval is an agreement in principle between the developer and the BCC indicating general acceptance of the proposed uses, size, type, intensity and conditions of the PD. Approval of the PD rezoning shall constitute an amendment to the official zoning atlas, and the subject parcel shall be labeled with the description "PD" and PD number. 
b.  PD concept plan (general PD concept plan or detail PD concept plan) application, PD rezoning application, and the associated fees are required at the time of submission of an application. 
c.  Review procedure. 
1.  Site plan review (SPR). The proposed PD concept plan application shall be filed with an appropriate department, where it will be reviewed for sufficiency. Such department shall maintain a site plan review checklist listing the required components for a completed application. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such application, the appropriate department will review the application for completeness and notify the applicant, in writing, indicating that all required information is submitted or specifying with particularity any areas that are deficient. If such application is deficient, the applicant has thirty (30) days to address the deficiencies by submitting the required additional information. If the application is found sufficient, the zoning official will schedule a site plan review (SPR). The SPR will review the PD concept plan application for technical compliance to county codes and may attach appropriate conditions and safeguards it deems necessary. The SPR recommendation will be forwarded in writing as part of the PD rezoning to the P&Z board for their consideration and review. In order to have sufficient time for preparation of packet materials, the minimum amount of time between the SPR and the P&Z board meeting shall be four (4) weeks. 
2.  PD rezoning. The PD rezoning application shall be filed with the department, where it will be reviewed for sufficiency. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such application, an appropriate department will review the application for completeness and notify the applicant, in writing, indicating that all required information is submitted or specifying with particularity any areas that are deficient. If such application is deficient, the applicant has thirty (30) days to address the deficiencies by submitting the required additional information. If the application is found sufficient, the zoning official will schedule public hearing dates before the P&Z board and the BCC. Upon completion of its review, a staff report and recommendation will be issued, which will be forwarded to the P&Z board members and the applicant along with the recommendation of the PD concept plan from SPR no later than one (1) week prior to the public hearing. The P&Z board will review the application, recommendation of the SPR, staff report, and evidence presented at the public hearing. 
3.  BCC review. Upon receipt of the P&Z board's recommendation, the BCC shall conduct a public hearing with due public notice. The BCC shall then grant approval or disapproval based upon the criteria listed within this code. If denied, the BCC shall state the reasons for denial. In approving the PD rezoning, the BCC may establish reasonable conditions and may require modifications deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. These conditions shall be binding upon the applicant or any successors in interest. 
d.  Time limitation. The PD concept plan approval shall be valid until a final detail site plan is approved, or the property is rezoned from PD to another zoning district. 
A PD rezoning which was approved prior to the effective date of these regulations (October 26, 2021), may have the PD concept plan, whether expired or not, extended or approved as follows: 
1.  The applicant/property owner may petition the BCC to extend the expiration date of the PD concept plan. Such request shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the BCC. The extension shall contain a provision requiring the PD concept plan to conform to the code in effect at the time of the granting of the extension and other reasonable conditions as the BCC may impose. 
2.  The applicant/property owner may submit a final detail site plan application which may be granted as long as the final detail site plan is generally consistent with the approved PD ordinance's conditions, its PD concept plan, and the Charlotte County Code of Laws and Ordinances in force on the date of final detail site plan approval. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the BCC. 
Alternatively, an applicant/property owner may petition the BCC to rezone the property from PD to another zoning district following the procedures described in this code. Such petitions shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the BCC. 
(4)  Final detail site plan approval. 
a.  Final detail site plan approval authorizes permitting of the project. The applicant may apply for and be granted final approval for the entire PD or any phase of the project. 
b.  PD final detail site plan application and its associated fee are required at the time of submission of an application. 
c.  Review procedure. 
1.  Site plan review (SPR). Application for final detail site approval shall include an application, supportive materials, and plans as listed on the site plan review checklist maintained by the department. The county department will conduct a sufficiency review of the application; and if found sufficient, the zoning official or his/her designee will coordinate various departments for review. Within thirty (30) days after receiving such application, the department will review the application for completeness and issue a letter indicating that all required information is submitted or specifying with particularity any areas that are deficient. If such application is deficient, the applicant has thirty (30) days to address the deficiencies by submitting the required additional information. 
(i)  Based on the proposed final detail site plan, comments and recommendations, the BCC shall determine whether the final detail site plan complies with the county's comprehensive plan and land development regulations, federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and permit requirements, and the conditions of the PD rezoning with general PD concept plan. The applicant shall be notified by a letter from an appropriate county department of the BCC's decision. 
(ii)  Final detail site plan approval for projects which contained a detail PD concept plan which was approved by the BCC and did not require final approval by the BCC, shall be reviewed and approved by staff. 
d.  Time limitation. The department shall, in writing, notify the applicant approval of or denial of the final detail site plan. The final detail site plan shall be valid for a period of three (3) years from the date of approval. One (1) two-year extension may be granted by the zoning official. No additional extensions will be granted thereafter. If a portion of the approved final detail site plan has been constructed and received a certificate of occupancy, the remainder of the approved plan shall remain valid unless a major modification is requested. If the final detail site plan has expired, the applicant may apply for a reactivation of the final detail site plan. If deemed that a minor modification is required, the final detail site plan can be reactivated at the SPR level; and if deemed that a major modification is required, the applicant shall follow the same procedure as a new PD application. 
e.  Building permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued for a PD except in conformity with all provisions of the approved final detail site plan. 
All buildings and improvements in a particular phase need not be complete before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a completed building in that phase unless otherwise required by the final detail site plan. 
(5)  Modification of PD concept plan, PD conditions, or final detail site plan. 
a.  If a modification to the approved PD concept plan, conditions of approval or the approved final detail site plan are proposed, a written request for a determination whether the proposed changes are major or minor shall be submitted to the zoning official. The zoning official shall render a decision within fifteen (15) working days after submission of a complete request. Such request shall include an updated, revised PD concept plan, conditions, or final detail site plan, if applicable, indicating the effect of the proposed change and the reasons why such a change is necessary. Once a determination has been made that a proposed modification constitutes a major modification, the applicant shall follow the same procedure as a new PD application. 
b.  Minor modification. Any modification to an approved PD which does not constitute a major modification shall be considered a minor modification. Generally, minor variations, alterations or modifications of proposed uses, locations of signs, buildings/structures or other improvements which are consistent with the purpose and intent of the approved PD plan are considered minor modifications. 
c.  Major modification. Generally, additions, deletions, changes in the use, density, or other specifications of an approved PD concept plan or final detail site plan are considered a major modification. In reaching a decision as to whether or not the change(s) are substantial enough to be considered a major modification, and subject to reapplication as a new development plan, the zoning official shall, after reviewing the following criteria, determine whether the changes are substantial enough to be considered a major modification: 
1.  An increase of development rights shall generally be considered a major modification. In no case shall the intensity or density be increased over the maximum permitted by future land use map designation of the subject property. 
2.  Any change in parking areas resulting in an increase or reduction of ten (10) percent or more in the number of spaces approved. 
3.  Structural alterations significantly affecting the basic size and form of the building(s) as shown on the approved plan. Changes in form will only be considered substantial if they occur within two hundred (200) feet of the boundary of the PD district. 
4.  Substantial changes in location or type of pedestrian or vehicular accesses or circulation, as determined by the county engineer. 
d.  Appeal. A decision rendered by the zoning official as to whether a modification is major or minor may be appealed by the aggrieved applicant and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of such written determination. The appeal shall be forwarded to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with section 3-9-6. 
e.  Property owner authorization. If there are multiple property owners within a PD, and a property owner(s) files an application to amend the existing PD, it is not required to provide an authorization by the property owners who are not the applicants if the proposal will not increase or decrease density, intensity or development rights on their properties; however, notification of public hearings for such PD application shall be mailed to all other property owners within the PD. 
(e)  PD rezoning flow chart. 

(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 7; Ord. No. 89-46, § 1, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 2002-008, §§ 4, 5, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2008-053, § 1, 7-8-08; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2021-044, § 1(Exh. B), 10-26-21) 
Sec. 3-9-45.1 - Planned Development (PD) open space and setback special requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide alternative design criteria for open space and setback within different types of development. 
(b)  Development within the US 41 Overlay District (41OD). In order to promote compact and intense development within this overlay, the setback and open space requirements are reduced as follows: 
(1)  Setback. The twenty-five-foot PD setback is not required. 
(2)  Open space. A minimum of five (5) percent and a maximum often percent of the entire site shall be allocated towards open space or recreational uses. Outdoor public gathering places may be considered as open space, such as open-air plazas. 
(c)  Development within the Burnt Store Limited Development (BSLD) and Burnt Store Village Residential (BSVR) Future Land Use Map (FLUM) designations. 
(1)  Open space. Open space shall include recreational facilities, parks, sidewalks and trails, natural preserve areas, or other commonly owned or maintained areas of pervious surface. However, commonly-maintained man-made water-bodies may count as up to ten (10) percent of the total open space requirement. 
Development which includes recreational vehicle uses must contain at least three (3) acres of active recreational amenities. Such amenities may be counted towards the required twenty (20) percent minimum open space. 
(d)  Development within the Compact Growth Mixed Use (CGMU) FLUM designation. In order to promote compact and intense mixed-use development, the open space requirements are reduced as follows: 
(1)  Open space. A minimum of five (5) percent and a maximum of ten (10) percent of the entire site shall be allocated towards open space or recreational uses. Outdoor public gathering places may be considered as open space, such as open-air plazas. 
(e)  Development within the Rural Community Mixed Use (RCMU) FLUM designation or Conservation Subdivision. In order to protect and preserve the rural atmosphere, the setback and open space requirements are increased as follows: 
(1)  Setback: The minimum PD setback shall be fifty (50) feet unless otherwise approved by BCC. 
(2)  Open space. 
a.  For development within the Rural Community Mixed Use FLUM designation. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total site shall be set aside as rural residential open space. A minimum of forty (40) percent of the total site shall be set aside as rural residential open space if the proposal meets the requirements of alternative development set forth in the county's comprehensive plan. 
b.  For development within conservation subdivision. A minimum of seventy (70) percent of the total site shall be set aside as rural residential open space. 
At least fifty (50) percent of such open space shall remain undeveloped. The remaining fifty (50) percent may contain: 
1.  Bike paths, 
2.  Hiking trails, 
3.  Equestrian trails, 
4.  Canoeing and kayaking facilities, 
5.  Fishing facilities such as docks and limited storage for non-motorized boats, 
6.  Agricultural uses including accessory uses, 
7.  Stormwater management systems serving the community provided the stormwater systems are unfenced and are surrounded by, or adjoin, areas that are improved for use by wildlife and accessible to the residents of the development, and 
8.  Any required buffers. 
Existing agricultural areas may be maintained in agriculture, natural lands reserved as open space shall not be converted to agricultural uses. 
Golf courses shall not qualify as rural residential open space. 
Editor's note— (Ord. No. 2021-044, § 1(Exh. C), 10-26-21) 
Sec. 3-9-46. - Mixed-use (MU). 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the mixed-use (MU) district is to accommodate the development of vibrant, pedestrian-oriented places featuring a mixture of complimentary land uses including residential, commercial, office, and light industrial. Mixed-use developments should be designed to integrate multiple uses in individual buildings as well as throughout the site. In order to facilitate compact, walkable developments, the MU district allows for higher density and intensity and provides more flexible design standards and guidelines than found in traditional zoning. The MU district promotes the adaptive reuse of existing, outdated sites, and encourages the consolidation of small parcels into larger, viable, mixed-use developments. Mixed-use developments should feature networks of sidewalks to provide safe, comfortable, and attractive access to pedestrians, and be designed at a human scale to promote a distinct sense of place. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The standards set forth in this section shall apply to all new development within a MU district. 
(2)  For existing commercial sites that have been rezoned to MU, the standards set forth in this section shall apply to the redevelopment of existing buildings which increases gross floor area or assessed valuation by more than fifty (50) percent, and the redevelopment of commercial structures in which more than fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation of the structure has been destroyed. 
(3)  This section is not intended to prevent the use of alternative design solutions that meet the intent and purpose of this section, as determined by the zoning official or their designee. 
(c)  Mixed-use district categories. 
(1)  Neighborhood mixed use (MU-N). 
a.  Scale. Neighborhood mixed-use developments are intended to be smaller, lower impact, and integrate well into the surrounding residential community. MU-N developments are intended to be pedestrian- and bicycle-oriented, contribute to the efficient functioning and attractiveness of the surrounding neighborhood, and have a maximum size of ten (10) acres. The mix of uses may include retail, restaurants, dwelling units above the first floor, multifamily and single-family attached dwellings, general offices, medical offices, and civic uses. 
b.  Location. The location of a proposed MU-N development shall be designed to take advantage of daily activity patterns, such as at the corner of a residential collector street, at the entrance to a neighborhood, or in conjunction with a park, school, civic use, or public space. To serve its purposes, a MU-N development should be sited at the edges of a residential neighborhood, at a collector and arterial street intersection or a collector and local street intersection. 
(2)  Activity center mixed use (MU-AC). 
a.  Scale. Activity centers, depending on their size and service area, may serve several neighborhoods within a surrounding residential area with a mix of retail, office, service, civic, and attached residential uses, may accommodate large retail establishments, and may serve multiple residential areas and neighborhoods over a significant portion of the county. 
b.  Small activity centers range between ten (10) and twenty-five (25) acres in size. They are typically anchored by a grocery store, with supporting establishments. Secondary uses include other supporting neighborhood-oriented uses and residential uses, including upper floor units and townhouses to assure extended hours of activity within the district and support a mix of uses. The district should balance automobile access from arterial streets with transit orientation, pedestrian and bicycle access and circulation, and provides good transitions and connectivity with the surrounding neighborhoods. 
c.  Large activity centers are typically greater than twenty-five (25) acres in size and include a mix of commercial with supporting office, service, medical, residential and civic uses. Higher density residential is a critical component to assure extended hours of activity within the district and provide support for a mix of uses. Activities and uses should be concentrated and mixed in order to create more diversity and synergy between uses, combine destinations, support effective future transit service, and provide viable pedestrian and bicycle access and circulation. Mobility choices should be integrated by providing transit, pedestrian and bicycle connectivity within the center as well as to adjoining areas. Aging single or limited use local commercial centers and corridors should be redeveloped under this zone. 
d.  Location. Small MU-AC zone districts serve multiple neighborhoods and should balance automobile access from arterial and collector streets with transit orientation, pedestrian access and circulation, and have good connections with the surrounding neighborhoods. Large MU-AC districts serve significant subareas of the county and shall be designed to allow vehicle and pedestrian connectivity to surrounding residential areas. 
(3)  Regional mixed use (MU-R). 
a.  Scale. Regional center mixed-use developments are greater than fifty (50) acres in size and are the most intensive category of mixed-use developments, combining the uses of higher-density residential, commercial centers, and employment centers, and serve the county and region as a whole. The MU-R category should include a mix of commercial and employment uses integrated into a single, mutually supportive regional destination. These uses may range from regional mail anchor stores, government offices, and corporate headquarters to specialized retail and higher density housing. Because of their size, both sets of activities function as regional centers in terms of market for retail and employment opportunities. Higher density residential use is a critical component of a MU-R center in order to assure extended hours of activity within the district and provide support for a mix of uses. 
b.  Activities and uses should be concentrated and mixed to create more diversity and synergy among uses, combine destinations, support effective future transit service, and provide viable pedestrian and bicycle access and circulation. Mobility choices should be integrated by providing transit, pedestrian, and bicycle connectivity within the center as well as to the adjoining areas. 
c.  Location. A MU-R zone district should typically be located at the intersection of two (2) major arterial roadways, along major arterial roads, along the county's planned transit system, near other major regional transit terminals, or close to limited access freeways and interstate highways. Sites with direct access to existing or planned major transportation facilities and compatibility with adjacent land uses are appropriate for the MU-R zone district. 
(d)  Uses and structures permitted. 
(1)  Use Table 
P = Permitted Use; C = Conditional Use; S = Special Exception Use; —- = Prohibited Use 

 
a.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted and conditional uses and structures are also permitted in this district, including a residential dwelling unit within the same structure as the principal use for occupancy by owners or employees of permitted uses, and also including, but not limited to: 
1.  Fences or walls. 
2.  Clubhouse, community center on the same lot as the residential development or within the same residential development. 
3.  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar recreational uses and structures on the same lot as the residential development or within the same residential development. 
4.  Boat docks, boat lifts, and boat ramps. 
5.  Other accessory uses or structures as determined by the zoning official or their designee. 
b.  Conditional uses and structures. For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use, see section 3-9-69, as may be amended. 
c.  Special exception uses and structures. For procedure, see section 3-9-6.2, as may be amended. 
1.  All conditional uses and structures that cannot meet all conditions set forth in this Code. 
2.  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or their designee to be: 
(i)  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
(ii)  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in this district or allowed by special exception. 
(iii)  Not specifically prohibited in this district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or their designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6. 
d.  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception shall be unlawful in this district, including: 
1.  Single-family detached homes. 
2.  Outdoor storage. 
3.  Indoor storage as a principal use. 
4.  Drive-through restaurants. 
5.  Stand-alone surface parking lots. 
(2)  Required mix of uses. To ensure a balance between housing, retail, office, and other commercial and light industrial development within the MU zone categories, the following standards shall apply: 
Exhibit 1: Required Mix of Uses 

 
a.  Neighborhood mixed-use developments under five (5) acres in size are exempt from the open space requirement 
(3)  Mix of uses required in phased developments. If the development is phased, the first phase shall be sufficient to stand on its own as a mixed-use development. At a minimum, non-residential development shall be in the ratio of fifty (50) square feet per dwelling unit. 
(e)  Development standards. 
(1)  Density. 
a.  All density increases shall require a transfer of density units consistent with the county's TDU program. If the subject property contains less than the minimum range of allowed density for the MU category requested, the applicant, at the time of rezone approval, shall transfer density units equal to the minimum density range of the requested MU category in accordance with the county's TDU program. Mixed-use categories shall have a required minimum and total maximum density according to the following table: 
Exhibit 2: Range of Allowed Density 

 
b.  Density increase. In addition to the base density, additional density units may be granted through the county's incentive density program upon preliminary site plan review approval on the basis of the following: 
Exhibit 3: Density Increase Calculations 

 
a.  Final approval of incentive density units will be granted when concept plans and supplemental documents assure actions proposed at the time of preliminary site plan review approval. 
b.  Cumulative density. In no event shall the cumulative density granted exceed the maximum density permitted under the underlying land use in the comprehensive plan. 
c.  Incentive density may be granted as long as the county has adequate supply of incentive density units. Incentive density allocation to a specific project is valid for three (3) years and can be extended one (1) time by the board on the consent for additional two (2) years. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  No MU district shall be located on a bridgeless barrier island. 
b.  MU districts may be permitted within the coastal high hazard area, but are not eligible for density increases. 
(3)  Minimum lot and yard requirements. 
a.  The minimum lot size for a mixed-use district is two (2) acres. 
b.  There are no minimum yard requirements for this district, provided when subject property directly abuts a residentially-zoned property rather than being separated by a public right-of-way such as a street, no structure shall be located closer to the peripheral property line of the mixed-use district than twenty-five (25) feet or as required by section 3-9-88, as may be amended, whichever is greater. If the mixed-use district abuts water, the minimum setback shall be twenty (20) feet. However, minimum lot and yard requirements other than those contained in this section and section 3-9-88 may also be established through the final site plan review approval process. 
c.  There is no maximum lot coverage. 
d.  To encourage pedestrian-friendly streets by bringing buildings close to pedestrian sidewalks and walkways, the county encourages principal, non-residential, multi-family, and mixed-use buildings to be built to the back edge of the public sidewalk (zero-foot build-to line) except as necessary to allow room for outdoor seating and service areas, outdoor sales and displays, landscaping, entryways, and similar pedestrian and customer amenities. The build-to area between the front property line and the front building wall of residential structures may be used to provide space for privacy, landscaping, private courtyards/open areas/entryways, and similar amenities. 
(4)  Setbacks. 
a.  Setbacks are established based upon the street frontage of the lot, according to the street types established as follows: 
1.  Perimeter streets. Existing streets bounding the perimeter of the site. 
2.  Primary streets. Streets that provide connections from secondary streets to the perimeter streets. 
3.  Secondary streets. Streets that provide connections internal to the mixed-use development. These streets are intended to maintain low vehicle speeds and facilitate pedestrian and bicycle movements. 
(i)  Angled roadways and offset intersections are acceptable on secondary streets. 
(ii)  Secondary streets should be laid out in a connected network. The use of cul-de-sacs is prohibited. 
(iii)  Driveway access is not limited, but alley access and shared driveways are encouraged. 
4.  Alleys. Alleys provide rear access to sites for parking access, refuse collection, utilities, and other services. 
(i)  The use of alleys is encouraged. 
(ii)  Alley access points are permitted only onto secondary streets. 
(iii)  Fire access shall not be required for alley design where adequate emergency service access exists along another frontage street. 
Exhibit 4: Model Street Network Diagram 

Exhibit 5: Maximum Setbacks 

 
(5)  Height allowances. 
Exhibit 6: Building Height Allowances 

 
a.  Cumulative bonus. In no event shall the cumulative height bonuses exceed the maximum height established for the proposed development's applicable mixed-use category. 
(6)  Transitional zone tools. To mitigate potential conflicts between land uses of varying intensities and character, the following considerations shall be made during the site plan review process with particular focus to proposed structures and uses located at the perimeter of the proposed MU development: 
a.  Site and building design. Building setbacks, building placement and orientation, building heights. 
b.  Green and open space. Use and location of parks, plazas, squares, promenades, courts, etc., and use of natural features such as topography, waterways, existing trees and vegetation. 
c.  Siting of less-intensive uses around perimeter of MU development, particularly when a MU development directly abuts a residential area (i.e. offices instead of bars/restaurants). 
d.  Operational standards for commercial uses sited at the perimeter of the development, including hours of operation, delivery hours and loading zones, location and intensity of lighting, etc. 
e.  Use of parkways and streetscape enhancements. 
f.  Enhanced landscaping and buffers between mixed-use developments and existing single-family residential areas. 
(7)  Site and building design. 
a.  In order to allow for creative site and building design within mixed-use districts, these regulations do not establish a required architectural style. In order to create a sense of place, site design should produce an overall unified theme and be designed to maximize pedestrian comfort and accessibility. 
b.  In the event any portion of this article conflicts with any other county code provision or provision of applicable law, the provision that establishes specific architectural themes shall prevail. In the event that neither conflicting provision establishes a specific architectural theme, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
c.  Block standards. 
1.  Block standards shall apply to all development larger than five (5) acres. 
2.  In order to prevent traditional linear or "strip" style commercial development, depth-to-width ratios shall not exceed 1-to-4. All block dimensions shall be measured from back of curb to back of curb. Right-of-way widths shall not be included in the measurement of block widths. 
3.  All development shall be arranged in a pattern of interconnecting streets and blocks to form a grid-like system. This system may be made up of publicly-dedicated rights-of-way, private streets, or a combination of both. 
4.  The minimum building separation on alleys shall be thirty (30) feet from building face to building face. 
5.  The minimum block face shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
6.  The maximum block face shall be eight hundred (800) feet. 
7.  For block faces that exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, a mid-block pedestrian pass-through shall be provided connecting opposite sides of block faces. 
8.  An applicant may submit alternative block standards, provided they meet the intent of this section, at the time of preliminary site plan review. 
d.  Building orientation. 
1.  A continuous pedestrian walkway extending the full length of the perimeter of the site shall be provided. Perimeter walkways shall be at least eight (8) feet wide. 
2.  All buildings shall have at least one (1) building entrance oriented toward an abutting internal or perimeter street with on-street parking, or toward an on-site pedestrian walkway connected to a public sidewalk. 
3.  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the front facade of a building shall be placed along the front setback line. When a lot is located at a corner, both sides of the corner shall be considered the front and shall meet front setback and street frontage requirements. 
(i)  For developments with multiple buildings on a single lot, at least one building shall be placed along the front setback line. 
(ii)  For larger MU developments consisting of multiple lots, each lot shall be subject to this requirement. 
4.  For developments with multiple buildings, all buildings shall be arranged and grouped so that their primary orientation complements adjacent, existing development, as applicable, and is consistent with one (1) of the following site layouts: 
(i)  Buildings orient toward, frame, and enclose a main pedestrian and/or vehicle access corridor within the development site, including an entry/spine street; or 
(ii)  Buildings orient toward, frame, and enclose, on at least three (3) sides, parking areas, public spaces, or other on-site amenities; or 
(iii)  Buildings orient toward and frame the corner of a perimeter or internal street intersection; or 
(iv)  Buildings orient toward adjoining development, respecting adjoining exterior street alignment(s) that frame and enclose on at least three (3) sides parking areas, public spaces, or other on-site amenities. 
5.  Corner lots shall place as much building mass near the intersection as possible to help anchor the lot and take advantage of high visibility. 
6.  Buildings may front along a pedestrian plaza in place of fronting along a street. Any building located at the corner of a street and a pedestrian plaza shall include a public entrance along the street facade, even if the main entrance faces the pedestrian plaza. 
7.  Building entrance design: the primary public entry to the building shall be clearly defined and building entrances shall incorporate elements that provide shade from the sun and weather protection for pedestrians. 
e.  Appearance, building mass, and design treatments. The following standards are the minimum design standards. In order to qualify for the enhanced design criteria and receive bonus height allowances, the applicant is required to submit a pattern book in accordance with subsection (14), below, for review which exceeds these minimum design standards. Pattern books shall be approved as part of the site plan review process. 
The intent of this section is to encourage development that improves the view from the street and requires buildings to be designed with architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest and enhance the community's identity and character. These standards are intended to reduce the mass, scale, and monolithic appearance of large, unadorned walls, particularly those visible from the street. 
The regulations set forth in article XXIV, as may be amended, shall apply to MU districts except as specifically addressed in the following subsections. 
1.  Facades. 
(i)  All exterior building facades which face a public right-of-way, even if they are separated by a median or interior travel way, face a plaza or other public space, or have a primary customer entrance are defined as primary facades and shall meet the primary facade standards outlined herein. 
(ii)  Buildings which directly abut a plaza or other public gathering space shall feature a primary customer entrance on the side of the building abutting the plaza or other public gathering space. 
(iii)  Primary facades shall be consistent in terms of design, materials, details, and treatments. 
(iv)  Window coverage on ground floors shall be a minimum of forty (40) percent. Window coverage for upper floors shall be a minimum of twenty (20) percent. Reflective glass may not be used on the ground floor of any building to prevent glare from vehicular traffic. 
(v)  All primary building entrances shall be accentuated. Permitted entrance architectural accents may include, but are not limited to: recessed, protruding, canopy, portico, or overhang. 
(vi)  Buildings located on corner lots at an intersection of two (2) or more perimeter streets shall be designed to emphasize their location as transition points within their community or commercial block. Buildings or structures on corner lots shall include embellishments such as corner towers, clock towers or other design features as may be approved by the zoning official or their designee to emphasize their position. 
(vii)  Loading doors, service doors, and loading docks shall not be located on any primary facade facing a street. 
(viii)  New buildings that are to be located within two hundred (200) feet of any existing commercial or residential building on an abutting lot, and that are to be more than twice the height of any existing building located within two hundred (200) feet of the new building, shall incorporate elements to transition the height of the new building to the height of the existing building(s). The transitional height element must be incorporated on the new building(s) at the average height of existing building(s) located within two hundred (200) feet of the new building. 
Transitional height elements may include: 
A.  Cornices or other decorative elements which run the length and width of the building and project a minimum of three (3) feet from the wall. 
B.  Offset floors. 
C.  Any other element that as determined by the zoning official or their designee, meets the intent and purpose of this section. 
(ix)  Murals are permitted on building facades except where facing a perimeter street. 
2.  Building massing. 
(i)  Buildings shall be designed to avoid the appearance of a large, monotonous building mass by dividing large facades into the appearance of several sections or smaller buildings. 
(ii)  Buildings must have at least a three-foot break in depth in all front facades for every one hundred (100) feet of continuous facade. Such breaks may be met through the use of bay windows, porches, porticos, building extensions or recesses, balconies, towers, and other architectural treatments. 
f.  All new utilities shall be located underground unless prohibited by the respective utility provider. 
g.  Dumpsters shall comply with section 3-5-513, as may be amended. 
h.  Loading and service areas shall comply with section 3-9-79(i) and section 3-5-513, as may be amended. 
i.  Fences and walls shall comply with section 3-9-72, as may be amended. 
j.  All exterior mechanical and electrical equipment shall be fully screened from view from public rights-of-way and public plazas. 
(8)  Parking. 
a.  Off-street parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79, as may be amended. 
b.  Areas of off-street surface parking shall be located at the side or the rear of the primary structure it is intended to serve. Areas of off-street surface parking shall not directly abut any perimeter streets. For structures without frontage on a perimeter street, parking areas may be permitted at the front of the structure. 
c.  The required number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced as approved by the county engineer or their designee. Any applicant seeking a parking reduction shall submit a parking study prepared by a licensed professional engineer that provides justification for the requested reduction. At a minimum, the parking study shall address, where applicable: 
1.  The types of uses. 
2.  Total square footage by uses. 
3.  Estimated time and number of spaces required at peak parking demand. 
4.  ADA-accessibility requirements. 
5.  Employment characteristics including, but not limited to, total number of employees and number of employees per shift. 
6.  A description of any factors that may reduce or increase the parking demand. 
The applicant may choose to further support the proposed number of parking spaces by providing documentation on the experience of similar uses located in the same or other jurisdictions. 
d.  Traffic impact statements are required during preliminary site plan Review. 
e.  Areas of off-street surface parking shall be landscaped in accordance with subsection (10), below. 
f.  All parking spaces shall incorporate curbing, wheel stops, bollards, or other similar element as approved during the site plan review process. 
g.  Parking structures. 
1.  Stand-alone parking structures shall comply with the design requirements of this section. 
2.  Stand-alone parking structures are encouraged to accommodate retail or commercial wrapped around the ground floor. 
3.  Parking structure facades shall be designed to screen views of automobiles by the general public through the use of features such as grills, lattices, mock windows, louvers, or false facades. Such screening shall be in keeping with the rest of the building's architectural style and materials. 
4.  Parking structures without ground floor retail uses along the front facade shall have a minimum ten-foot wide building perimeter planting area. 
5.  All structures with uncovered parking on the top level shall have rooftop planters around the perimeter that are a minimum of five (5) feet wide located around a minimum of eighty (80) percent of the perimeter of the parking integral to the structure, or suitable architectural features to soften the building edge. 
6.  Lighting fixtures located on the top level of uncovered parking structures shall be a maximum of twenty (20) feet in height. Lighting shall incorporate full shield cut-offs to contain light to the surface of the deck only. 
h.  Bicycle parking. 
1.  A minimum number of bicycle parking spaces shall be provided, equal to ten (10) percent of the total number of vehicle parking spaces provided by the development, but not less than one (1) space. 
2.  Bicycle parking facilities shall be located no further than one hundred (100) feet away from a building entrance, shall be visible from the uses and structures they serve, and shall not be located in remote vehicle parking areas. Bicycle parking facilities shall not be located in places that impede pedestrian or automobile traffic flow or that would cause damage to landscaping. 
3.  Spaces for short-term bicycle parking shall provide a means for the bicycle frame and one (1) wheel to be attached to a permanent fixture, designed for securing bicycles, by means of a lock. 
(9)  Pedestrian circulation. 
a.  All pedestrian pathways shall be constructed with a minimum width of eight (8) feet and meet or exceed all regulations established in the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
b.  All new development and redevelopment shall provide and contribute to an on-site system of pedestrian pathways that provide continuous access to all land uses within a development site and to all land uses on adjacent properties. All new sidewalks and multi-modal paths shall connect with adjacent existing sidewalks and multi-modal paths. 
c.  Freestanding planters and protective devices, such as bollards, may be installed between sidewalks and adjacent vehicular traffic to help shape the pedestrian environment. 
d.  Intersections. At all on-site intersections and pedestrian crossings, brick pavers, stamped concrete or other similar material shall be installed to provide clear visual delineation for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
1.  Crosswalks shall be a minimum of six (6) feet and a maximum of twelve (12) feet in width. 
2.  All crosswalks for perimeter and primary streets shall include illuminated or flashing crosswalk signage. 
e.  Internal pedestrian circulation and connections. The on-site system of sidewalks or multi-modal pathways shall provide the most efficient access route between the intended points on travel. Specifically, on-site pedestrian connections shall be provided to and between the following points: 
1.  The primary entrance(s) to each building containing a principal use. 
2.  Greenways, bikeways, and trail systems. 
3.  Existing and/or planned transit stops, stations, and park and ride locations. 
4.  On-site amenities, as provided in subsection (11), below. 
5.  Parking areas. 
f.  Pedestrian malls or promenades. 
1.  Pedestrian mails or promenades shall be developed within the equivalent of a street right-of-way, with a minimum fifty-foot right-of-way width. Buildings shall be set back from the right-of-way area the same distance as from a street. The pedestrian mall or promenade shall intersect a public street in the same manner that a street would. 
2.  Except for landscaping, pedestrian paving shall cover the entire right-of-way. Pedestrian paving shall be enhanced through decorative pavers or other similar materials; asphalt and plain concrete paving shall not be permitted. 
3.  With the exception of emergency and delivery vehicles, automobiles shall be prohibited in pedestrian mail or promenade areas. Paving sections shall be designed to accommodate emergency and delivery vehicles. Necessary clear zones shall be kept so that vehicles may access the buildings. Deliveries shall be restricted to hours when the pedestrian mall is not open to the public. 
4.  Loading dock entries shall not face onto pedestrian mails or promenades. 
5.  Seating areas, which may include benches or seats grouped around or attached to a table, shall be provided along each block face at a rate of five (5) linear feet of seating per three hundred (300) linear feet of pedestrian mall or promenade. 
6.  Landscaping shall be provided throughout pedestrian malls or promenades and shall comprise at least twenty-five (25) percent of the pedestrian area. Up to fifty (50) percent of the landscaped area may be planted with shrubs or flowers in planters or pots. Additionally, at least one (1) tree shall be planted for every five hundred (500) square feet of required planting area. Planting areas should utilize native, Florida-friendly groundcover other than sod. 
7.  Between two (2) and four (4) paired trash and recycling receptacles shall be placed along each block face with more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of building area. 
g.  Traffic calming. Developments shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following traffic calming devices to slow traffic and improve pedestrian mobility and safety. The location, type, and number of traffic calming devices on-site shall be determined during final site plan review by the county engineer or their designee. Options for traffic calming devices include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Curb extensions/bulb-outs. 
2.  Raised median islands. 
3.  Traffic circles/roundabouts. 
4.  Chicanes. 
5.  Speed tables. 
6.  Raised crosswalks/intersections. 
7.  On-street parking. 
(10)  Landscaping. The following standards are the minimum design standards. In order to qualify for the enhanced design criteria and receive bonus height, the applicant is required to submit a pattern book for review which exceeds these minimum design standards. 
a.  The regulations set forth in section 3-9-100, as may be amended, shall apply to MU districts except as specifically addressed in the following subsections. 
b.  MU districts are not eligible to pay into the native tree replacement fund established in section 3-9-100(i) in lieu of planting the required number of trees. 
c.  Florida-friendly landscaping principles shall be employed in all landscaped areas in MU developments. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of required tree points shall be obtained from native species. 
d.  The use of Florida-friendly groundcover, such as native grasses, is encouraged as an alternative to sod throughout the development. 
e.  Root barriers shall be installed where canopy trees with large root systems are proposed in required parking lot islands or where proposed within ten (10) feet of curbing, driveways, sidewalks, and buildings in order to prevent roots from damaging infrastructure. 
f.  Building perimeter plantings. All new development and redevelopment in MU districts shall provide, at a minimum, building perimeter plantings equal to ten (10) percent of the proposed building ground level gross floor area. These plantings shall be located abutting at least three (3) sides of the building with emphasis on the sides most visible to the public, not including any loading area(s). 
1.  The building perimeter planting areas shall consist of raised planters, planter boxes, or in-ground landscaping areas. Building perimeter plantings shall include shrubs and ground cover plants with a minimum fifty (50) percent coverage of the landscaped area at time of planting. Trees are also permitted to be planted in the building perimeter planting areas. 
2.  The use of sod or other non-ornamental grasses is not permitted in building perimeter planting areas. 
3.  Stormwater management areas may not be located in building perimeter planting areas. 
4.  Pedestrian pathways may cross through and loading areas may be placed in the building perimeter planting areas, but these shall not be counted towards the minimum planting area or open space requirements. 
5.  Decorative paving areas incorporating courtyards, walkways, water features, plazas, covered seating and outdoor dining spaces may be used to meet up to twenty (20) percent of the required building perimeter planting area. 
6.  Vine planted arbors, wall planters, and trellis structures may be used to meet up to fifteen (15) percent of the required building perimeter planting area. 
g.  Perimeter landscape strips. 
1.  Perimeter landscape strips are required wherever a lot abuts a public right-of-way. Required plantings may be located in public rights-of-way with written consent from the county engineer and authorized occupation of easement agreement(s), as applicable. 
2.  Perimeter landscape strips shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
3.  Perimeter landscape strips shall be planted with a minimum of one (1) tree per thirty-five (35) linear feet, and one (1) shrub, at least eighteen (18) inches in height at the time of planting, per eight (8) linear feet. Trees within a section of perimeter landscape strip may be grouped, but the distance between trees in a section shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
h.  Parking lot landscaping. 
1.  Where surface parking abuts a street, pedestrian pathway, or residential use, a continuous hedge of at least three (3) feet in height shall be planted, in addition to one (1) tree per thirty-five (35) linear feet, or fraction thereof. 
2.  Parking lot island landscaping shall comply with section 3-9-100.2. 
3.  Parking lot medians shall contain one (1) tree per thirty-five (35) linear feet, or fraction thereof, and shall be planted at regular intervals. 
4.  Landscaping treatments such as shrubs, groundcover, and/or flower beds shall be planted in parking lot medians. 
5.  Sod is not permitted in parking lot islands or medians. 
i.  Buffers. Where a MU district abuts residential-zoned property and is not separated from the adjacent property by a public right-of-way, a minimum twenty-five-foot wide Type C buffer is required, as described in section 3-9-100.1, as may be amended. There is no zoning buffer required for MU districts abutting existing commercial- or industrial-zoned properties. 
(11)  On-site community amenities. 
a.  Plazas and public gathering spaces. 
1.  Required open space areas shall be designed as focal points within the development and shall be easily accessible and open to the public. 
2.  MU developments with more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor area shall provide a minimum of one (1) square foot of plaza area for every fifty (50) square feet of gross building floor area. 
3.  Individual plazas shall be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet and a maximum of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. 
4.  Plazas shall be surrounded on all sides by streets, pedestrian walkways, or by primary facades of buildings. 
5.  Areas of surface parking shall not be located adjacent to any plazas or public gathering spaces. 
6.  At least twenty-five (25) percent, but no more than eighty (80) percent, of a plaza shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and groundcover. 
(i)  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all plantings shall be native species. 
(ii)  Trees shall be planted near seating areas to provide shade. 
7.  Plazas shall be centrally located within MU developments and provide easy and convenient access from all residential and non-residential buildings. 
8.  Plazas shall include a defining central element, such as a large fountain, sculpture, gazebo, pavilion, pagoda, clock tower, pond, or similar feature. Plazas shall also be improved with a variety of other amenities, such as small fountains, public art, shade trees, trash receptacles, benches, play equipment, decorative pedestrian lighting, trellises, and other similar features. 
9.  All hardscape elements, including, but not limited to, street furniture, planters, lighting fixtures, trash receptacles, and drinking fountains, shall have a cohesive theme for the development. 
10.  Each plaza shall contain at least one (1) wayfinding sign or informational kiosk. 
11.  Stormwater management areas may be permitted in plaza and open space areas in the form of bioswales. 
b.  Outdoor seating. 
1.  Outdoor seating areas shall be incorporated within the site to create assembly areas for pedestrians whenever possible. When all setbacks, sight lines, and safety regulations are followed, the use of a widened sidewalk may be used to accommodate a seating area. Seating areas shall incorporate umbrellas, attached structural awnings, canopy trees, and/or other pedestrian amenities. 
2.  A minimum of five (5) linear feet of seating, such as a bench or cluster of chairs, shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of plaza area. Areas seating at least four (4) people at a time shall be provided at the rate of one (1) per block face, outside of plaza areas. 
3.  Outdoor dining areas shall not encroach into pedestrian pathways. Areas of outdoor dining shall be separated from pedestrian pathways and other public rights-of-way by utilizing decorative fencing or bollards with linked chains measuring four (4) feet in height. 
4.  For areas of outdoor dining, advertising or promotional features shall be limited to umbrellas, a menu board, and canopies. 
c.  Inclusive play. All designated play areas and play equipment on site shall follow the principals of Universal Design (North Carolina State University, 1997) to ensure accessibility for people of all ages and abilities. 
d.  Street furniture and streetscaping. 
1.  Street furniture shall be maintained by the property owner and shall be constructed of durable materials such as cast iron, stainless steel, aluminum, or similar materials. 
2.  Between two (2) and four (4) paired trash and recycling receptacles shall be placed along each block face with more than forty thousand (40,000) square feet of commercial uses, one (1) pair at each end of the block and additional receptables spaced evenly between. A minimum of one (1) additional paired trash and recycling receptacle shall be provided for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of plaza/open space. 
3.  One (1) drinking fountain shall be provided for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of plaza/open space. 
4.  The use of "hostile architecture" or "defensive architecture," in street furniture, including "anti-homeless spikes," is prohibited. 
(12)  Lighting. The intent of this section is to prevent the intrusion of light from mixed-use developments onto adjacent properties and to create a compatible and consistent design of lighting for the project. This section further intends to prevent the interference of lighting with automotive and pedestrian traffic, which can create potentially hazardous conditions. The regulations set forth in section 3-5-512, shall apply except as addressed in the following subsections. 
a.  A development-wide lighting plan shall be submitted for review at the time of final site plan review submittal. This plan shall address at a minimum the general location and general types of lighting to include the following: street lighting, pedestrian walkway lighting, crosswalk lighting, signage lighting, and lighting for service and delivery areas. 
b.  The design of the actual lighting fixtures shall complement the design of the project in style, color, materials, and location. Lighting shall have a unified theme for the entire site, including outparcels. Lighting fixtures shall be ornamental and decorative, but all lighting fixtures located along the perimeter of the site or illuminating a public street or right-of-way shall meet or exceed standards established by the Charlotte County Public Works Department or FDOT. 
c.  The use of decorative lighting fixtures on building facades is encouraged. 
(13)  Signage. The intent of this section is to ensure consistency in the design of signage associated within a development, whether developed as a single phase or in multiple phases, and to ensure consistency in design between signage constructed on outparcels and the buildings constructed in the principal area of a project site that may have more than one (1) delineated, buildable lot, and which may or may not be developed at the same time or by the same builder. 
a.  In addition to advertising goods and services available at a location, signs are intended to compliment, rather than detract from, the visual impact of a commercial development on the community by using design elements consistent with those employed for the building(s), and by minimizing conflicts with on-site landscaping and vehicular use areas. 
b.  All signs shall comply with the requirements of section 3-9-95, except that all primary freestanding signs shall be monument signs. The use of pole signs, pylon signs, and flutter flags are prohibited. 
c.  Where multiple on-premises signs are proposed for a single site or project (including outparcels), or in the case of a shopping center or multi-tenant/use building, a unified signage plan shall be employed. Signage plans shall be submitted during the final site plan review process and shall be accompanied by a written narrative and graphic depiction of the signage that will be developed on-site which illustrates consistency of design. The unified sign plan may, upon application to and approval of the zoning official or their designee, be amended to reflect style changes or tenant needs. Design elements, which shall be addressed in both graphic and narrative form, include: 
1.  Adherence with the provisions of section 3-9-95; 
2.  Colors; 
3.  Construction materials; 
4.  Architectural design; 
5.  Landscape design, as applicable; 
6.  Illumination method; 
7.  Copy style; and 
8.  Sign type(s) and locations. 
d.  Illuminated crosswalk signs shall be installed at all internal crosswalks and where crosswalks connect to public sidewalks and other rights-of-way. 
e.  Wayfinding signage. 
1.  Wayfinding signage is intended to provide directions and identify points of interest, not for advertisement of any particular business. Wayfinding signage is exempt from the size and quantity provisions of section 3-9-95. 
2.  Wayfinding signage shall measure a minimum of two (2) feet by two (2) feet. 
3.  Colors, fonts, and overall design shall feature a unified theme for the entire development. 
4.  Wayfinding signs shall be illuminated and comply with all ADA regulations. 
f.  Primary freestanding signs shall feature a decorative base and shall include landscaping around the base of the sign to soften their appearance. The planting area around the base of the sign shall be equal to a minimum of forty (40) percent of the total area of the sign and shall include shrubs and groundcover. Landscaping shall maintain clear sight triangles in accordance with section 3-9-89. 
(14)  Pattern book requirements. 
a.  Pattern books may be used to establish design standards which exceed those set forth in this section. If an applicant has elected to use a pattern book, the pattern book must demonstrate how the site will exceed the established site, building, and/or landscaping design standards through a detailed narrative, written guidelines, and illustrated renderings. If approved, the applicant may be eligible for the bonus development allowances as stated in this section. 
b.  Pattern books shall be submitted as part of the preliminary site plan review process. 
c.  Pattern books may be submitted to define development parameters and design standards applicable within a defined site, area or subdistrict to establish some or all of the governing design parameters and standards, which may constitute waivers of submittal requirements and deviations, including, but not limited to: setbacks, building heights, building orientation, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, signage, density, intensity, lot sizes, coverages, and standards for roadway design and rights-of-way. 
d.  Approval of pattern books shall be issued by the zoning official or their designee upon finding that standards, waivers, and deviations are consistent with and not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. An amendment to an approved pattern book may be requested at any time, to be approved by the zoning official. Approval of pattern books and pattern book amendments shall not be unreasonably withheld, and if approval is not granted by the zoning official within thirty (30) days of submittal, the pattern book shall be subject to review and approval by the board of county commissioners. Where standards defined in an approved pattern book conflict with provisions of this section, the pattern book shall apply. Development in areas that are not subject to a pattern book shall be governed by the standards and provisions set forth in this section. Approved pattern books shall be available for inspection upon request at the community development department. 
(15)  Sustainable design bonuses. 
a.  In order to qualify for additional height bonuses provided in exhibit 6, a minimum of three (3) of the following options shall be incorporated into the site and building designs. Approval shall be determined during the preliminary site plan review process. 
1.  Bioswales. 
2.  Use of native groundcover and plants in replacement of sod throughout entire development—pollinator gardens, native grasses, wildflowers, etc. 
3.  Reuse of water—reclaimed water for irrigation, etc. 
4.  Electric car charging stations. 
5.  Rain garden. 
6.  Green roof covering at least fifty (50) percent of roof; rooftop gardens; vertical wall plantings. 
7.  Use of permeable/pervious pavers. 
8.  Recycling of non-hazardous construction and demolition debris. 
9.  Utilization of a minimum of fifty (50) percent recycled building materials. 
10.  Solar powered lights (non-safety lights). 
11.  Other sustainable design elements as determined by the zoning official or their designee. 
(Ord. No. 2020-050, § 1(Exh. B), 12-8-20) 
Sec. 3-9-47. - Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code.[4] 
(a)  Intent, applicability, and boundaries. 
(1)  Intent. The intent and purpose of the Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code is to meet the intent of the Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Plan, providing a comprehensive approach to planning future development, improvements to transportation, utilities, and other public infrastructure in the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
(2)  Applicability. In addition to any requirements contained elsewhere in the Code, the requirements of this Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code shall apply to any subdivision, special exception, variance, site plan approval, planned development rezoning approval, building permit or sign permit, or any other official action of the county having the effect of permitting development and shall be in addition to each and every other requirement of the Code. In the event of any conflict between applicable provisions of the Code and this section regarding a specific application or development, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(3)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the Charlotte Harbor Community shall be the area as depicted as the Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Area on Charlotte 2050 FLUM Series Map #26: Community Redevelopment Areas. 
(b)  Definitions. Terms used in this Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code shall take their commonly accepted meaning unless otherwise defined in this Section or in the Code. When there are terms defined both in this Section and elsewhere in the Code, the definitions for such terms contained in this Section shall control. 
Access (vehicular): The principal means of vehicular ingress and egress to abutting property from a street, right-of-way or easement. 
Alter or alteration: Any change in size, shape, character or use of a structure, including, but not limited to a change, rearrangement or reconstruction of the structural parts and the moving from one location or position to another. Normal maintenance, painting and repairs to existing signs shall not be deemed alterations within the meaning of this section. 
Application: An application for any subdivision, special exception, variance, site plan approval, planned development rezoning, building permit, sign permit, or any other official action of the county having the effect of permitting development of property. A rezoning (except a planned development) or a future land use map amendment shall not be considered an application herein. 
Awning: A covering either permanently attached to the building or which can be raised or retracted to position against the building when not in use. 
Awning canopy: Awning with the long axis projecting perpendicular to the building rather than parallel and requiring posts or poles to support the end of the canopy furthest away from the building. 
BCC: The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Building frontage: The length of the building which directly faces a street or, for a shopping center which exceeds 100,000 square feet, an off-street parking area located on the development site. Where a business may not face a street or off-street parking area, the building frontage shall be the main face or front of the business. 
Canopy roof: A freestanding structure attached to or covering a building designed to provide pedestrian and vehicular protection, including, but not limited to, canopies over gas pumps and drive-up windows. 
Charlotte Harbor CRA: Community Redevelopment Area in Charlotte Harbor approved and adopted by the board by Resolution 92-251 on November 3, 1992, and amended by Resolution 2008-72 on July 8, 2008 in accordance with Part III, Chapter 163, Florida Statutes. 
Code: The Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida, as the same may be amended from time to time by the board. 
Director: Director of the community development department of the county or designee. 
Erect or develop: Either term may be used to mean the following: To build, construct, install, reconstruct, move on, or conduct any physical development of a premises required for a building or other structure, or to excavate, fill, drain, cut or remove trees, brush or other vegetation in preparation for erection or development. 
Historic building: A building that has been designated by the Charlotte County Historic Preservation Board and the BCC as a historic structure. 
Historic district: A geographically definable area designated and possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also be comprised of individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. 
Live-work unit: A single dwelling unit that accommodates limited commercial uses within the dwelling but to a greater extent than a home occupation. 
Microbrewery: An establishment that produces malt beverages for sale on premises and in packages for later consumption off premises via retail carry-outs or through distribution. 
Microdistillery: An establishment that produces distilled spirits for sale in packages for later consumption off premises via retail carry-outs or through distribution. Sales for on-premises consumption are prohibited. 
Microwinery: An establishment that produces wine, as defined by Florida Statute, including alcoholic cider and mead, for sale on premises and in packages for later consumption off premises via retail carry-outs or through distribution. 
(c)  Zoning districts. 
(1)  Zoning districts allowed. The following zoning districts are the only zoning districts permitted within the Charlotte Harbor Community: 
a.  Environmentally Sensitive (ES), see section 3-9-28 for allowable uses. 
b.  Residential Single-family (RSF), see section 3-9-33 for allowable uses. 
c.  Residential multi-family (RMF), see section 3-9-34 for allowable uses. 
d.  Commercial general (CG), see section 3-9-42 for allowable uses. 
e.  Industrial general (IG), see section 3-9-43 for allowable uses. 
f.  Planned development (PD), see section 3-9-45 for allowable uses and required development standards. 
g.  Charlotte Harbor Coastal Residential (CHCR). 
1.  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow single-family residential dwellings and other compatible uses within the Charlotte Harbor Community. It is only permitted within the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
2.  Permitted uses and structures (P). 
(i)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six or less (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(ii)  Emergency services. 
(iii)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(iv)  Park. 
(v)  Single-family detached. 
3.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures are also permitted in this district. 
(i)  Boat lifts, boat ramps, and noncommercial boat docks. 
(ii)  Carports, garages, and storage structures. 
A.  Detached accessory structures greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet in footprint shall be compatible in appearance with the primary residence. At a minimum, materials and colors shall be compatible with the primary residence. 
B.  The total footprint of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the parcel size or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater for a property less than one-half (0.5) acre. If the property is 0.5 acre or more in size the total footprint of all detached accessory structures shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. The property owner(s) may apply for a special exception to exceed the total maximum accessory structures size limitations contained in this section. 
C.  Detached accessory structures except carports and garages shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence, but must maintain required setbacks. 
D.  Construction trailers and cargo containers are prohibited. 
(iii)  Fences and walls which may be permitted prior to the principal uses and structures. 
(iv)  Greenhouses and other horticultural uses, provided no retail sales are made on the premises. 
(v)  Guest suite, detached, consisting of living and sanitary facilities only. Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in a detached guest suite. It must meet all applicable development standards set forth in the zoning district. 
(vi)  Keeping of pets, excluding animal breeding, boarding, and training. 
(vii)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, or other similar noncommercial recreational uses and structures. 
4.  Conditional uses and structures (C). (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, Conditional uses and structures) 
(i)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(ii)  Cluster housing (See section 3-9-67, Cluster housing). 
(iii)  Minor home occupation (See section 3-9-74, Home occupations). 
(iv)  Model home (See section 3-9-78, Model homes). 
(v)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height (See section 3-9-68, Communication towers). 
5.  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by Special Exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, commercial parking lots, and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by special exception, shall be unlawful in this district. 
6.  Special exceptions (S). (See section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions) 
(i)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(ii)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(iii)  Day care center, child. 
(iv)  Essential services. 
(v)  Place of worship. 
(vi)  Private off-site parking. 
(vii)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning officer or his/her designee to be: 
A.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
B.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
C.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
7.  Development standards. 

 
  
(i)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be ten feet along the rear lot line and 20 feet abutting water. 
(ii)  Class I and Class II projects, as established by the architectural design standards included within this section, shall not be placed closer to the sidewalk, street, or visible alley than the average distance established by existing structures. 
h.  Charlotte Harbor Neighborhood Business Residential (CHNBR). 
1.  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to provide daily convenience goods, professional, personal, and business services, and multifamily residential needs of the residents located within the Charlotte Harbor Community and to act as a buffer between and transition between residential and commercial areas. It is only permitted within the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
2.  Permitted uses and structures (P). 
(i)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(ii)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(iii)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(iv)  Bank, financial services. 
(v)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(vi)  Day care center, child. 
(vii)  Duplex or triplex. 
(viii)  General offices. 
(ix)  General retail sales and services. 
(x)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(xi)  Park. 
(xii)  Personal services. 
(xiii)  Place of worship (See section 3-9-82. Places of worship). 
(xiv)  Professional services. 
(xv)  Public building. 
(xvi)  Restaurant. 
3.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures are also permitted in this district. 
4.  Conditional uses and structures (C). (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, Conditional uses and structures). 
(i)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(ii)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(iii)  Multi-family, provided it is not located south of Bayshore Drive along the Charlotte Harbor shoreline. 
(iv)  Single-family attached, provided it does not front along U.S. 41. 
(v)  Single-family detached, provided it does not front along U.S. 41. 
(vi)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height (See section 3-9-68, Communication towers). 
5.  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by Special Exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, commercial parking lots, and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by Special Exception, shall be unlawful in this district. 
6.  Special exceptions (S). (See section 3-9-6.2, Special exceptions). 
(i)  Day care center, adult or child. 
(ii)  Essential services. 
(iii)  Live-work unit, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  Commercial activities shall be conducted only by a resident of the dwelling unit. 
B.  No more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit may be devoted to commercial use. 
C.  No more than one (1) non-illuminated sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, may be attached to the building. The sign must be on or next to the entrance. 
D.  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials used in connection with the commercial use. 
E.  Parking must be provided in accordance with the parking provisions of this Code. 
F.  Up to five (5) persons who do not reside in the dwelling unit may be employed by the commercial use, subject to the provision of appropriate parking spaces. 
G.  No portion of a live-work unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial space for any person or persons not residing within the residential space, or as a residential unit for any person or persons not working within the commercial space. 
H.  Hours of operation shall generally be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Deliveries and pick-up shall generally be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
I.  Any operator of the business in a live-work unit must obtain, and keep current for as long as the commercial use is in operation, a business tax receipt from the Charlotte County Tax Collector, also known as the "Local Business Tax Receipt." 
J.  The following uses shall be prohibited from being operated in a live-work unit: 
a.  Animal boarding facility. 
b.  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
c.  Drugstore, pharmacy. 
d.  Dry cleaner. 
e.  Equipment rental. 
f.  Laundromat. 
g.  Liquor, package store. 
h.  Passenger vehicle rental. 
i.  Printing. 
(v)  Private off-site parking. 
(vi)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning officer or his/her designee to be: 
A.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
B.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
C.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. an unfavorable determination of the zoning official shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
7.  Development standards. 

 
  
(i)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be ten (10) feet along the rear lot line and twenty (20) feet abutting water. 
(ii)  Class I and Class II projects, as established by the architectural design standards included within this section, shall not be placed closer to the sidewalk, street, or visible alley than the average distance established by existing structures. 
8.  Special regulations. 
(i)  Single-family residential development. Any single-family dwelling in existence along U.S. 41 at the time of the adoption of this section shall not be considered a nonconforming use. If a single-family dwelling along U.S. 41 is declared uninhabitable by the building official and application to make appropriate repairs is not made within one hundred twenty (120) days of that declaration the structure shall be considered nonconforming. 
(ii)  Commercial development. 
A.  Commercial only buildings are limited to three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross leasable area. Larger developments may only be approved through special exception and must contain a mix of both residential and non-residential uses. 
B.  Drive-through facilities are permitted provided both the building and the drive-through window are accessible from an arterial road. 
C.  Off-street parking requirements shall be one-half (½) those required by section 3-9-79, Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(iii)  Setbacks to adjoining residential zoning. Any development that abuts a residential zoning district of lower density shall have a setback of at least fifteen (15) feet adjacent to the residential zoning district within which no structure other than any required landscaping and screening may be constructed. 
i.  Charlotte harbor mixed use (CHMU). 
1.  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is to allow a combination of multi-family residential, commercial, and professional office development. It is only permitted within the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
2.  Permitted uses and structures (P). 
(i)  Animal hospital, boarding facility. 
(ii)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(iii)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(iv)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven (7) or more (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(v)  Auditorium, convention center, performing arts center. 
(vi)  Bank, financial services. 
(vii)  Business services. 
(viii)  Clubhouse, community center. 
(ix)  Day care center, child. 
(x)  Drug store, pharmacy. 
(xi)  Dry cleaner. 
(xii)  Duplex or triplex. 
(xiii)  Emergency services. 
(xiv)  General offices. 
(xv)  General retail sales and services. 
(xvi)  Hotel, motel, inn. 
(xvii)  Laundromat. 
(xviii)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(xix)  Multi-family. 
(xx)  Nursing home. 
(xxi)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(xxii)  Park. 
(xxiii)  Passenger vehicle rental. 
(xxiv)  Personal services. 
(xxv)  Place of worship (See section 3-9-82, Places of worship). 
(xxvi)  Professional services. 
(xxvii)  Public building. 
(xxviii)  Recreation, indoor. 
(xxix)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(xxx)  Restaurant. 
3.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures are also permitted in this district. 
4.  Conditional uses and structures (C). (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69, Conditional uses and structures). 
(i)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(ii)  Equipment rental, provided that storage of all equipment and all business transactions shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building. 
(iii)  Microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  All brewing, distilling, or winemaking equipment visible from the street (excluding alleys), adjacent residential uses, or adjacent residential zoning shall be screened using architectural features consistent with the principal structure or shall be displayed in a manner that showcases the equipment and function. 
B.  For loading, storage, and equipment areas facing U.S. 41, Kings Highway, Harborview Road and Edgewater Drive, a perimeter landscape strip with parking lot screening, as established in section 3-9-100.2, shall be installed and maintained to screen those areas. In instances where redevelopment of a site may not require site plan review, a landscape plan showing the required buffer, signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Landscape Architect, shall be submitted for approval. 
C.  No outdoor storage shall be allowed, including the use of portable storage units, cargo containers, and tractor trailers. Spent or used grain or fruit may be approved to be stored outdoors for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours if such storage complies with the following standards: 
a.  It shall be designated on the approved site plan. 
b.  It shall be prohibited within any required area (parking, open space, landscape buffers, etc.) or any setback adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning. 
c.  It shall be fully enclosed within a sealed container, secured and screened behind a solid, opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
D.  The requirements and standards of the appropriate state and federal department shall be met and evidence of current appropriate state and federal licenses must be shown. 
(iv)  Private off-site parking. 
(v)  Single-family attached, provided it does not front along U.S. 41. 
(vi)  Single-family detached, provided it does not front along U.S. 41. 
(vii)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height (See section 3-9-68, Communication towers). 
(viii)  Transitional/halfway housing. 
5.  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, commercial parking lots, and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by special exception, shall be unlawful in this district. 
6.  Special exceptions (S). (See section 3-9-6.2, Special exceptions) 
(i)  Ampitheater. 
(ii)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(iii)  Bed and breakfast, three or more bedrooms. 
(iv)  Carpentry, cabinetmaking. 
(v)  Day care center, adult or child. 
(vi)  Elementary, middle, or high school. 
(vii)  Essential services. 
(viii)  Heliport, helistop. 
(ix)  Homeless shelter. 
(x)  Leisure vehicle rental. 
(xi)  Liquor, package store. 
(xii)  Motor vehicle wash. 
(xiii)  Non-retail food production. 
(xiv)  Outdoor market or exhibition space. 
(xv)  Printing. 
(xvi)  University or college. 
(xvii)  Vocational, trade, or business school. 
(xviii)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning officer or his/her designee to be: 
A.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
B.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
C.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the Zoning official shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
7.  Development standards. 

 
  
(i)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be ten (10) feet along the rear lot line and twenty (20) feet abutting water. 
(ii)  Class I and Class II projects, as established by the architectural design standards included within this section, shall not be placed closer to the sidewalk, street, or visible alley than the average distance established by existing structures. 
8.  Special regulations. 
(i)  Setbacks to adjoining residential zoning. Any development that abuts a residential zoning district of lower density shall have a setback of at least fifteen (15) feet adjacent to the residential zoning district within which no structure other than any required landscaping and screening may be constructed. 
(ii)  Height. 
A.  Height may be increased to ninety (90) feet according to the development standards provisions of this section. 
B.  Property subject to the waterfront property provisions of this Code may achieve a height of sixty (60) feet through an approved special exception. 
j.  Charlotte Harbor Riverwalk (CHRW). 
1.  Intent. The purpose and intent of this district is intended to allow a mix of commercial, multi-family residential, and tourist-related uses in a pedestrian-oriented manner while providing public access to Charlotte Harbor and connecting to downtown Punta Gorda. It is only permitted within the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
2.  Permitted Uses and Structures (P). 
(i)  Art, dance, music, photo studio or gallery. 
(ii)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six or less (See section 3-9-62. Adult congregate living facilities). 
(iii)  Bank, financial services. 
(iv)  Duplex or triplex. 
(v)  Emergency services. 
(vi)  General offices. 
(vii)  General retail sales and services. 
(viii)  Hotel, motel, inn. 
(ix)  Marina. 
(x)  Medical or dental office, clinic. 
(xi)  Multi-family. 
(xii)  Paid or public parking lot, garage, structure. 
(xiii)  Park. 
(xiv)  Personal services. 
(xv)  Public building. 
(xvi)  Restaurant. 
3.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures are also permitted in this district. 
4.  Conditional uses and structures (C). (For rules and regulations for any use designated as a Conditional Use or Structure, see section 3-9-69, Conditional uses and structures). 
(i)  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, seven or more (See section 3-9-62, Adult congregate living facilities). 
(ii)  Bed and breakfast, one (1) or two (2) bedrooms. 
(iii)  Boarding, rooming house. 
(iv)  Microbrewery, microdistillery, or microwinery, provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  All brewing, distilling, or winemaking equipment visible from the street (excluding alleys), adjacent residential uses, or adjacent residential zoning shall be screened using architectural features consistent with the principal structure or shall be displayed in a manner that showcases the equipment and function. 
B.  For loading, storage, and equipment areas facing U.S. 41, Kings Highway, Harborview Road and Edgewater Drive, a perimeter landscape strip with parking lot screening, as established in section 3-9-100.2, shall be installed and maintained to screen those areas. In instances where redevelopment of a site may not require site plan review, a landscape plan showing the required buffer, signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Landscape Architect, shall be submitted for approval. 
C.  No outdoor storage shall be allowed, including the use of portable storage units, cargo containers, and tractor trailers. Spent or used grain or fruit may be approved to be stored outdoors for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours if such storage complies with the following standards: 
a.  It shall be designated on the approved site plan. 
b.  It shall be prohibited within any required area (parking, open space, landscape buffers, etc.) or any setback adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning. 
c.  It shall be fully enclosed within a sealed container, secured and screened behind a solid, opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
D.  The requirements and standards of the appropriate state and federal department shall be met and evidence of current appropriate state and federal licenses must be shown. 
(v)  Telecommunications facility, fifty (50) feet or less in height (See section 3-9-68, Communication towers). 
5.  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, commercial parking lots, and private clubs not otherwise permitted, or permitted by special exception, shall be unlawful in this district. 
6.  Special exceptions (S). (See section 3-9-6.2, Special exceptions). 
(i)  Ampitheater. 
(ii)  Auditorium, convention center, performing arts center. 
(iii)  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
(iv)  Bed and breakfast, three (3) or more bedrooms. 
(v)  Community residential home, six (6) or fewer clients. 
(vi)  Community residential home, seven (7) or more clients. 
(vii)  Day care center, adult or child. 
(viii)  Leisure vehicle rental. 
(ix)  Liquor, package store. 
(x)  Outdoor market or exhibition space. 
(xi)  Passenger vehicle rental. 
(xii)  Private off-site parking. 
(xiii)  Recreation indoor. 
(xiv)  Recreation, outdoor. 
(xv)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning officer or his/her designee to be: 
A.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
B.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
C.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, Board of zoning appeals. 
7.  Development standards. 

 
  
(i)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall be ten (10) feet along the rear lot line and twenty (20) feet abutting water. 
(ii)  Class I and Class II projects, as established by the architectural design standards included within this section, shall not be placed closer to the sidewalk, street, or visible alley than the average distance established by existing structures. 
8.  Special regulations. 
(i)  Setbacks to adjoining residential zoning. Any development that abuts a residential zoning district of lower density shall have a setback of at least fifteen (15) feet adjacent to the residential zoning district within which no structure other than any required landscaping and screening may be constructed. 
(ii)  Height. Height may be increased to ninety (90) feet according to the development standards provisions of this section. 
(iii)  Structure dimensions. Structures may abutting the shoreline may exceed two hundred (200) feet in width or length, provided that the structure is designed and positioned on the site in a way that maintains public pedestrian access to the Riverwalk trail and that views of the water are maintained. 
(2)  Use Table. 

 
  
(d)  Development standards. 
(1)  Established nonconformities. Established uses or structures, not including signs, within the Charlotte Harbor Community shall not be rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this section. Such structures and uses within the Charlotte Harbor Community shall be treated as if they were conforming for the duration of the structure or use. If an existing use ceases for more than one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days, such use shall not be reestablished if such use would not be in compliance with the provisions of this section, except when such cessation of use is caused by a catastrophic event beyond the property owner's control. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event an application to change the use of a property from a use not permitted under this section to that of a conforming use is approved, the property and all development thereon must comply with all the provisions of this section upon approval of such application, and any established uses or structures thereon shall be considered nonconforming thereafter. 
(2)  Disaster recovery. Following a natural disaster, as determined by the BCC, a structure that was legally conforming or legally nonconforming immediately prior to said disaster may be replaced or restored on the original footprint, with no increase in square footage, and in compliance with height requirements in effect at the time of original construction and applicable state and federal standards. If the structure cannot be rebuilt using the same footprint and within the allowed height, approval shall only be granted following the procedures outlined by the variances provisions of this Code. Reconstruction must begin within five (5) years of the declaration of natural disaster, otherwise new construction must be in compliance with this Code. 
(3)  Front setbacks. In general, front setbacks in the Charlotte Harbor Community are intended to be reduced in order to create a pedestrian-friendly environment by reducing the scale of large surface parking areas along the corridors. All zoning districts unique to the Charlotte Harbor Community shall have their front setbacks established according to this section. All other zoning districts shall have the following front setbacks: 

 
  
Class I and Class II projects, as established by the architectural design standards included within this section shall not be placed closer to the sidewalk, street, or visible alley than the average distance established by existing structures. 
(4)  Buffers. If a site is subject to buffer requirements, as established by this Code, greater in depth than the maximum front setback, the development may propose an alternative design that reallocates required buffer material to allow structures to comply with the front setback standard. The reallocated material shall equal that which would have otherwise been required for the linear frontage. That requirement shall be based on the minimum buffer for the applicable type, with the facade to be considered as the required wall/fence. In addition, up to an additional ten percent of the property's linear frontage buffer material may also be relocated onsite. To receive approval, the community development director's designee must review and approve the proposed design. That review will determine the design's ability to comply with the purposes and intent of the Code. 
(5)  Street frontage. In general, development other than single-family detached dwellings should be located closer to the street in order to create a pedestrian-friendly environment. 
a.  In certain zoning districts, a minimum percentage of the front facade of a building shall be placed along the front setback line according to the following table: 

 
  
b.  In the creation of a campus-style development with multiple buildings at least one building must be placed along the front setback line. Not all buildings in the campus must be placed along the front setback line. 
c.  When a parcel fronts along U.S. 41. Edgewater Drive, Harborview Road, or Kings Highway, that frontage shall be considered the front of the parcel, and street frontage requirements shall apply to that roadway. When a parcel fronts along more than one of these roadways, the following hierarchy shall be used to determine the front: 
1.  U.S. 41. 
2.  Kings Highway. 
3.  Harborview Road. 
4.  Edgewater Drive. 
d.  When a parcel is located at a corner, both sides of the corner shall be considered the front and shall meet front setback and street frontage requirements. 
(6)  Height increases. 
a.  Properties within the Riverwalk sub-district that are adjacent to the shore. 
1.  Projects may seek to increase structure height to ninety (90) feet. 
2.  In order to increase height above thirty-five (35) feet, a project is obligated to contribute to the revitalization of the Charlotte Harbor Community. Two opportunities to contribute are included below, with each allowing an increase in height as indicated. The first is required for any increase in height up to sixty (60) feet. The second may be used to gain the full ninety (90) feet of height. 
(i)  Waterfront projects that dedicate a non-exclusive twelve-foot wide easement for public access to the waterfront shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. Said easement shall lie immediately adjacent to the shoreline. Future development of the easement shall not hinder the property owner's access to and from the water. The easement shall be for access of the general public and shall have as a goal the completion of a complete walkway system, called the Riverwalk, which links all waterfront projects in the Charlotte Harbor Riverwalk sub-district. 
(ii)  Waterfront projects that agree to construct the Riverwalk within the dedicated twelve-foot wide easement required above shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of thirty (30) feet. Private construction of the Riverwalk must meet county-approved design standards. 
b.  Properties within the Riverwalk sub-district that are not adjacent to the shore. 
1.  Projects may seek to increase structure height to ninety (90) feet. 
2.  In order to increase height above thirty-five (35) feet, a project is obligated to contribute to the revitalization of the Charlotte Harbor Community. Opportunities to contribute are included below, with each allowing an increase in height as indicated. The first is required for any increase in height up to sixty (60) feet. The others may be used to gain the full ninety (90) feet of height. 
(i)  A project that agrees to contribute a calculated amount to the Harborwalk Enhancement Fund shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet. The amount of the contribution shall be set by resolution by the BCC. 
(ii)  A project that dedicates an area equal to at least fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the largest floor of the project to uses other than residential or hotel, such as retail or restaurants, shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. All non-residential and non-hotel uses shall be accessible to the general public in perpetuity and shall be located on the lowest habitable floor of the building. 
(iii)  A project that provides public parking shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. Public parking shall meet all of the following standards: 
A.  Public parking shall be provided on at least half of the non-residential parking spaces between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Thursday and between 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. Friday through Monday. 
B.  Parking must be inter-connected with adjacent parking lots. If the project is adjacent to a vacant parcel, adequate provisions for future connectivity shall be made as part of the project's site plan. 
C.  The number of driveways connecting the parking lot to public rights-of-way shall be minimized. 
(iv)  A project that provides additional green space shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. 
c.  Properties within the U.S. 41 Gateway sub-district. 
1.  Projects may seek to increase structure height to ninety (90) feet. 
(i)  A project that dedicates an area equal to at least fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the largest floor of the project to uses other than residential or hotel, such as retail or restaurants, shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. All non-residential and non-hotel uses shall be accessible to the general public in perpetuity and shall be located on the lowest habitable floor of the building. 
(ii)  A project that provides public parking shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. Public parking shall meet all of the following standards: 
A.  Public parking shall be provided on at least half (½) of the non-residential parking spaces between 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Thursday and between 6:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. Friday through Monday. 
B.  Parking must be inter-connected with adjacent parking lots. If the project is adjacent to a vacant parcel, adequate provisions for future connectivity shall be made as part of the project's site plan. 
C.  The number of driveways connecting the parking lot to public rights-of-way shall be minimized. 
(iii)  A project that provides additional green space shall receive an increase to the allowable maximum height of ten (10) feet. 
(7)  Reduction of off-street parking requirements. In order to reduce the amount of surface parking and present a more pedestrian-friendly development form, projects may reduce the number of off-street-parking spaces provided. This may be done through one or more of the following methods: 
a.  Shared parking. Shared parking facilities for developments or uses with different operating hours or different peak periods may be permitted if the shared parking complies with all of the following standards: 
1.  Shared parking spaces must be located within six hundred (600) feet of the primary entrance of all uses served. 
2.  Shared parking may be approved following a parking analysis that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking and addresses, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing parking spaces. 
3.  Shared parking shall require an agreement between all property owners and the county, acceptable to the county attorney's office, that will run with the land until such time as the need is extinguished. An executed agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the applicant and a certified copy provided to the zoning official. Recordation of the agreement must take place prior to issuance of development approval. A shared parking agreement may be dissolved only if all required parking spaces will be provided, in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
4.  Where the uses subject to a shared parking agreement change, the zoning official shall have the authority to require a revised shared parking study and a new shared parking agreement when the revised shared parking study indicates additional parking is required. 
b.  Public parking. Public parking within one-quarter (¼) mile of a building entrance may be counted toward meeting an equivalent amount of required off-street parking. 
c.  On-street parking. Designated on-street parking spaces located within five hundred (500) feet of the entrance of a building may be counted toward meeting up to twenty-five (25) percent of the required minimum off-street parking. 
d.  Private off-site parking. Required parking may be located on a separate, non-adjacent lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the following standards: 
1.  No private, off-site parking may be located more than six hundred (600) feet from the entrance of the building with which it is associated. Off-site parking may not be separated from the use served by an arterial road unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway is provided or other traffic control or remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
2.  In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, the county shall require an agreement between all property owners and the county, acceptable to the county attorney's office, that will run with the land until such time as the need is extinguished. An executed agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the applicant and a certified copy provided to the zoning official. Recordation of the agreement must take place prior to issuance of development approval. An off-site parking agreement may be dissolved only if all required parking spaces will be provided, in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
3.  Off-site parking may not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or equipment. 
4.  Off-site parking must be developed according to all applicable development standards of this Code. 
(8)  Signs. 
a.  Applicability. All signs within the Charlotte Harbor Community shall be installed according to the general sign provisions of this Code, except where detailed below, which shall supersede the general provisions. 
b.  Maximum sign allocation. The signage allocation for any unit shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet if a pole or pylon sign is used, including no more than thirty-two (32) square feet used for additional signage, or three hundred eighty (380) square feet if a monument sign is used, including no more than thirty-two (32) square feet for additional signage. 
c.  Maximum sign area. 
1.  Signs in the Charlotte Harbor Community shall have the following maximum areas: 

 
  
2.  The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed including the frame around the sign, but not any supporting structure or brace. For designs consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building wall, or window, or signs in which the letters or symbols extend beyond the frame, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest geometric shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols. 
d.  Height. Primary freestanding signs shall have the following height limits: 

 
  
e.  Window signs. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of a unit's total window area may be used to display additional signage. 
f.  Portable signs. Portable signs are allowed without a sign permit, provided they meet the following criteria. The area of a portable sign shall not be deducted from a unit's sign allocation. 
1.  Only one (1) portable sign shall be permitted per unit. 
2.  Portable signs shall only be displayed during the hours of operation of the business they advertise. 
3.  Portable signs shall be placed so that they do not interfere with pedestrian or vehicle circulation, nor with sight triangle visibility. 
4.  Portable signs shall be placed within twenty (20) feet of the business they advertise and on the same lot on which the business is located. 
5.  Portable signs are limited to twenty-four (24) inches wide by forty-eight (48) inches high. 
g.  Landscaping. Primary freestanding signs shall have their bases landscaped in order to soften their appearance. Such landscaping shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Landscaping shall consist of groundcover or shrubs, as defined in the buffers, landscaping, and tree requirements provisions of this Code. 
2.  The planting area around the base of the sign shall be equal to forty (40) percent of the total area of the sign. 
3.  All landscaping must be installed and maintained in accordance with the buffers, landscaping, and tree requirements provisions of this Code. 
4.  Landscaping must maintain clear sight triangles in accordance with the Visibility at road intersections provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Charlotte Harbor Community architectural design standards. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of the architectural design standards is to regulate the design of new construction and the repair, rehabilitation or remodeling of existing structures throughout the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
(2)  Intent. The intent of the architectural design standards is to enhance and maintain the character of the Charlotte Harbor Community by establishing design requirements that serve two primary functions. The first is to enhance the integrity of existing structures. The second is to create a community whose character is consistent with the "old Florida" vernacular style of architecture. The latter development is anticipated over time, particularly as the standards are applied to new construction. 
(3)  Old Florida vernacular. The "old Florida" vernacular style is adopted as the architectural pattern for the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
(4)  Classes of design requirements. The architectural design standards consist of general requirements and specifications, period requirements, and design requirements. 
(5)  Classes of construction. There are four (4) classes of construction projects in the Charlotte Harbor Community. Each class of construction must comply with all of the general requirements and specifications and the design requirements that are applicable to that class of construction. Only Class I and Class II projects must comply with the period requirements. The four classes of construction are: 
a.  Class I projects. Class I projects consist of the building of a new structure, or modification or addition to an existing structure such that the existing structure must be elevated to meet base flood elevation requirements pursuant to the floodplain management provisions of this Code. Class I projects are intended over time to create a community whose character is consistent with the period style of architecture. 
b.  Class II projects. Class II projects are rehabilitation of commercial structures. Class II projects consist of any repair, rehabilitation or remodeling of an existing commercial structure valued at fifty (50) percent or more of the value of the existing structure over a five-year period regardless of whether such repair, rehabilitation or remodeling requires elevation of the existing structure to regulatory base flood levels pursuant to the floodplain management provisions of this Code. 
c.  Class III projects. Class III projects are residential rehabilitation not requiring the elevation of existing structures to regulatory base flood levels. Class III projects also include commercial rehabilitation, reconstruction, remodeling, or additions valued at forty-nine (49) percent or less of the value of the existing structure over a five-year period. 
d.  Class IV Projects. Class IV projects consist of decks, patios; permanent swimming pools; fences, walls, gazebos, sheds and other outbuildings, vending booths, carts, and other miscellaneous displays. 
(6)  Materials. Wherever the general requirements and specifications, period requirements, or design requirements reference the use of period materials, nothing shall preclude the use of modern materials that are the visual equivalent of period materials and which are equal or superior to period materials in regard to strength and durability. 
(7)  General requirements and specifications. 
a.  Applicability. The general requirements and specifications apply to all development in the Charlotte Harbor Community. 
b.  Generally. Due to the broadness of the general requirements and specifications, each general requirement and specification will not pertain to every type of development activity in the Charlotte Harbor Community. If a development includes renovations to or new construction for any of the architectural elements listed in this section, the development activity will need to comply with the general requirement and specification pertaining to that element. The zoning official will make the final determination of which architectural element requirements apply to the development. 
c.  Building orientation. Building entrance shall be oriented to the primary street with the main entrance visible from the primary street. Buildings located on corner parcels are encouraged to frame the building to relate to the street and provide the best use of the location. 
d.  Exteriors. Wood is the most commonly used material for architectural features such as clapboards, cornices, brackets, entablatures, shutters, columns and balustrades. These wooden features are important in defining the character of a structure. The retention, protection and repair of all wood features shall be required in all rehabilitation projects. 
1.  Exterior siding options. 
(i)  Weatherboard, clapboard, or lapped siding. 
(ii)  Wood, vertical board-and-batten siding with one-inch—by-two-inch or one-inch—by-three-inch battens. 
(iii)  Wood, horizontal novelty or drop siding. 
2.  A combination of exterior siding materials is prohibited unless period evidence indicates otherwise or additions were clad differently than the original structure. 
3.  The introduction of a new wood feature that is incompatible in size, scale, material, or color is prohibited. 
4.  Exterior siding shall be painted. 
e.  Balustrades. Wooden balustrades are significant in defining the period character of frame structures. 
1.  Wooden balustrades shall be retained and preserved. 
2.  When replacement is necessary, balustrades shall be replaced with materials that are compatible with the structure. 
3.  New balusters shall match the original balusters in size and height above the porch floor. 
f.  Masonry. Masonry features (such as brick cornices and door pediments, stone window architraves, terra cotta brackets and railings) as well as masonry surfaces (molding, bonding patterns, joint size and color) are important in defining the period character of a building. It should be noted that while masonry is among the most durable of building materials, it is also the most susceptible to damage by improper maintenance or repair techniques and by harsh and abrasive cleaning methods. 
1.  Masonry features that are important in defining the overall period character of the building such as walls, brackets, railings, cornices, window architraves, door pediments, steps, and columns shall be identified, retained, and preserved. 
2.  Masonry features shall be repaired using recognized preservation methods. Where masonry features are too deteriorated to repair, they shall be replaced in kind using physical evidence to guide the work. 
g.  Roofing (materials). 
1.  The replacement or substitution of period roofing materials on period structures with roof treatments that are inconsistent with the period (e.g. Spanish tile) is prohibited. 
2.  Masonry joints must be repainted and deteriorated mortar must be removed by hand. 
h.  Roofs (shape). The roof with its shape, features such as dormers, widow's walks, and chimneys, and the size, color, and patterns of the roofing material are extremely important in defining the building's overall character. 
1.  A roof's shape and features such as dormers, widow's walks, chimneys, scuttles, or roof porches shall be retained and preserved. The form and configuration of a roof must not be altered in pitch, design or shape unless such change will enhance the character and period design of a structure. 
2.  Changing the configuration of a roof such that the period character is diminished is prohibited. 
i.  Gutters. Gutter style is reflective of the property's history in terms of appearance and technology. 
1.  Only the half-rounded style of gutter shall be installed on structures erected prior to 1900. 
2.  Only half-round or "ogee" style shall be installed on structures erected after 1900. 
j.  Dormers. 
1.  A dormer addition shall be in scale and harmony with the existing building, shall have a roof consistent with that of the existing structure, and shall have windows of the same design as the existing structure. 
2.  The juncture of the dormer roof with the main roof shall be below the ridgeline of the main roof. 
k.  Widow's walks. 
1.  A widow's walk addition shall be in scale and harmony with the existing structure. 
2.  Period evidence of the prior existence of a widow's walk shall be the best justification for such an addition. 
l.  Secondary roof structures, skylights and scuttles. 
1.  Whenever possible, original skylights and wood roof scuttles shall be retained and preserved. 
2.  Flat, scuttles and skylights shall be located on the side that is least visible from a public street. 
m.  Entrances, porches, and doors. 
1.  Entrances and their functional and decorative elements that are important in defining the period character of a building, such as doors and door openings, fanlights, sidelights, pediments, hardware, pilasters, columns, balustrades, and stairs shall be identified retained and preserved. 
2.  Whenever possible, four- or six-paneled wood doors or horizontal panel doors as featured on late nineteenth and early twentieth century buildings shall be utilized. Larger buildings may have paired entry doors. Sliding glass doors may be appropriate for side or back entry but not front. French doors may be appropriate throughout the structure. 
3.  The additions of sidelights and entryway surrounds that are not original to the entrance are prohibited. 
4.  A porch on an existing structure, which contributes to the period character of the structure, shall not be removed. If a porch is to be enclosed, it shall be done in a manner consistent with the style and materials of the existing structure in a manner that preserves the character of the building. 
5.  Whenever possible, entrances and porches shall be repaired by reinforcing existing materials. When repair is not possible, limited replacement in kind or with compatible substitute materials shall be allowed. 
6.  An entire entrance or porch that is too deteriorated to repair shall be replaced in kind. If the form and detailing are still evident, the physical evidence shall be used to guide the new work. If using the same kind of materials is not technically or economically feasible, then a compatible substitute material shall be used. 
7.  In constructing a new entrance or porch, the design shall be compatible in size, scale, material, and color with the character of the building. 
n.  Columns, posts, and pillars. 
1.  Existing posts or columns that contribute to defining the character of the building shall be retained and preserved. 
2.  When columns must be replaced, they shall be replaced with columns compatible in size, scale and material. 
3.  Columns that have historically defined a building shall not be replaced with posts or pillars that are uncharacteristic of a building's style. For example, simple four-inch × four-inch wood square posts, not rounded, decorative columns, shall be utilized for a shotgun style house. 
o.  Exterior stairs. 
1.  Exterior staircases shall be retained, preserved and, when necessary, replaced with materials that are compatible with both the individual structure and the Charlotte Harbor Community architectural pattern. Replacement of wood stairs with concrete stairs is prohibited. 
2.  The balusters, newel posts, and rails of an exterior staircase shall be replaced with the same material, and shall be proportional to the main structure. 
3.  Period stairways shall be upgraded to meet health and safety codes in a manner that assures their preservation. 
p.  Ramps. 
1.  Ramps, where required, shall be concealed with landscaping as much as possible, and shall blend with the scale and architectural features of the building. 
2.  Ramps shall be constructed on less visible elevation using wrap-around design to achieve the needed grade change. 
q.  Windows. 
1.  Windows and their functional features that contribute to defining the period character of the building shall be identified, retained and preserved. Such features include frames, sash, muntins, glazing, sills, paneled or decorated jambs and moldings, and interior and exterior shutters and blinds. 
2.  When the replacement of windows in a structure is unavoidable, the replacement windows shall maintain the character of the structure. 
3.  Changing of the number, locations, size, or glazing pattern of windows by cutting new openings, blocking in windows, and installing a replacement sash that does not fit a window opening is prohibited, except in the case of life/safety requirements. 
4.  Period windows shall only be replaced with period windows. Repair and restoration of period windows shall maintain the period character of the windows. 
5.  Window glazing shall be clear, transparent, untainted and nonreflective. Stained glass may not be used on primary facades, except as an accent to the primary door or window covering no more than ten percent of the total area. Original transoms or sidelights may not be removed or changed. 
r.  Shutters. 
1.  Existing shutters and their functional and decorative elements shall be retained, repaired and preserved. 
2.  If the overall form and detailing are still evident, a set of shutters that is too deteriorated to repair shall be replaced in kind using the physical evidence to guide the work. If using the same kind of material is not technically or economically feasible, a compatible substitute material shall be utilized. 
3.  Hurricane shutters or panels shall be architecturally compatible with the building. When traditional shutters are not feasible or are inappropriate, removable storm panels shall be utilized (panels are stored except during a storm). Tracks for removable panels shall be painted to match the wall. Roll-down shutters shall be utilized on commercial buildings so as to allow concealment of the overhead casing. Accordion shutters shall be utilized on existing commercial buildings only if the stacked shutter is not conspicuous within the opening. 
s.  Awnings. Historically, the canvas or metal awning was an important design element in the traditional storefront, providing cover and added color. Awnings served as a transition between the storefront and the upper facade. 
1.  Standard street level awnings shall be mounted so that the valance is at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk elevation. 
2.  Awnings shall be attached above the display window and below the cornice. An awning shall reinforce the frame of the storefront and shall not cover the space between the second story windowsills and the storefront cornice. 
3.  The size, scale, and shape of awnings shall be appropriate to the specific building. 
4.  If a flat canopy exists, it shall be dressed up with a 12- to 24-inch awning valance. Round or dome-shaped awnings must be compatible with the structures on which they are to be placed, and shall be in proportion to the entryway. 
5.  Signage on an awning valance shall be approved on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the total number of signs per building or business establishment as provided by this Code. Lettering shall be one-half the height of the valance. 
6.  Freestanding fabric covered structures are allowed if they meet building code. 
t.  Exterior paint. 
1.  Neon and fluorescent colors shall not be used on any structure. 
2.  The use of black paint shall be limited to trim. 
u.  Building environment. 
1.  Features such as gardens, walkways, streets, alleys, plants, trees, fencing, and building setbacks which have traditionally linked buildings to their environment and which reflect the property's development shall be utilized and, in the case of existing structures, retained. 
2.  For walkways in residential areas, brick or paver type treatment shall be used whenever possible. 
3.  Traditional lawn and garden arrangements, with emphasis given to regional flora, shall be utilized whenever possible. 
4.  Concrete or gravel lawns, and permanent aboveground or in-ground swimming pools or hot tubs are prohibited in front yards. At least twenty-five (25) percent of a front yard shall be landscaped, and shall not be covered by brick, concrete, or gravel. 
5.  Widening of existing streets, changing the paving materials, and introducing new streets and new parking lots shall be done in a manner which is compatible with the character of the neighborhood and maintains the relationship of the buildings to the environment. 
v.  Gazebos, sheds, and other outbuildings. 
1.  The design of any gazebo, shed, or other outbuilding greater than one hundred (100) square feet in area shall be complementary in terms of design, scale, proportion, color, finish, and details to the main building. 
2.  Sheds of less than one hundreed (100) square feet in area shall be limited to two on any one (1) residential parcel. 
3.  Siting on the lot shall determine the allowable location and dimensions. 
4.  Temporary outside storage units shall be allowed to remain on a property for no longer than thirty (30) days in a calendar year unless the zoning official authorizes a greater period of time. 
w.  Lattice infill. 
1.  The space between the floor of the structure and the ground may be screened with lattice between supports of the house. 
2.  Only one type of infill shall be used for each structure. Lattice infill may be wood or recycled plastic. If wood, the lattice shall be a minimum of 0.25 inches and pressure-treated. Posts on which the lattice is to be mounted shall be set on four-foot centers. 
x.  Storefronts. Because storefronts play a critical role in a store's advertising strategy to draw customers, they are often altered to meet the needs of a new business. Care shall be taken when working on storefronts so that the building's character is preserved in the process of rehabilitation. 
1.  Storefronts and their functional and decorative elements that are important in defining the character of the building, such as display windows, doors, transoms, corner posts, entablatures, cornices, signs, and bulkheads shall be retained and preserved. 
2.  Fluorescent lighting shall be baffled so that lamps are not visible from the public right-of-way. Where neon tubing is visible from the street and used to outline building facades or window/door openings, it shall be limited to signage and not extended to bands. 
3.  The remodeling of storefronts shall be done in period style and materials. Repairs to storefronts and their features shall maintain the existing character of the structure. 
4.  Only appropriately scaled signs and logos that do not obscure, damage, or destroy a building's existing features shall be used. 
5.  The use of chaser lights is prohibited. 
y.  Air conditioning units. 
1.  Air conditioning units shall be installed in such a manner that period material and features of a building are not damaged or obscured. 
2.  Through-the-wall air conditioning units or window units shall not be installed in the front facade of a building. 
3.  Air conditioning units shall be placed in new openings that align with the existing window frame. Molding shall be utilized as a trim element. 
4.  Air conditioning units shall be concealed by landscaping or otherwise screened from view and shall not be placed in the front of a lot. 
z.  Garbage and trash. 
1.  When not at curbside for pick up, garbage and trash units shall be placed out of the public view. 
2.  A picket fence or other approved enclosure shall be utilized to screen areas where garbage and trash are stored prior to pick up or disposal. 
aa.  Archeological resources. 
1.  Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken according to state and federal regulations. 
2.  Discovered artifacts shall be promptly reported to the Charlotte County historic preservation board and the appropriate state and federal authorities. 
3.  Excavation of utility trenches, cisterns, and foundations require notification in advance so that activities may be monitored. 
bb.  Metal carports. Metal carports shall be utilized only on 1950/60's Mackle/GDC or other structures that were originally constructed with the structure. 
(8)  Period requirements. 
a.  Only Class I projects and Class II projects shall be required to comply with the period requirements. 
b.  Class I projects and Class II projects are required to use a minimum of four (4) of the features listed below when designing and constructing the building. 
1.  A veranda which runs the entire length of a structure's primary facade, minus any portion of the primary facade necessary for vehicular access (e.g. garages). Additional veranda length located along one of the sides abutting the primary facade as a continuous "wrap-around" veranda must be provided, equal to the length of the primary facade left open for vehicle access. 
2.  A metal roof of design and materials consistent with the period. 
3.  A widow's walk. 
4.  A cupola. 
5.  Windows, either as six/six (6/6) or two/two (2/2) windows. 
6.  Awnings or canopies. Placement, size, and shape must be compatible with the character of the building. They should be wide enough to cover the window or door opening and may be made of canvas or metal. Vinyl or plastic is prohibited. Fixed or retractable awnings are acceptable. They may be used on the street or upper stories as long as they are appropriate to and maintain the architectural style of the facade. Awnings on commercial structures should be open sided and valances are permitted. Awnings should not cover architectural features of the building. 
7.  Exterior shutters that are fixed, louvered, or panel and which are sized appropriate to the window frame. Color should complement the color of the main facade. Bahama shutters are not permitted on the front, street level windows on commercial buildings. Bahama shutters can be used on the upper story. 
8.  Decorative treatments. The use of decorative lattice or "gingerbread" treatments at gable peaks, building corners and other appropriate areas of the structure as illustrated in the pictures adopted as references to these standards. 
9.  At least two (2) of the following ground-level details: 
(i)  Low level decorative lighting. 
(ii)  Hanging flower baskets; planter boxes. 
(iii)  Decorative pavers leading to front door. 
(iv)  Pedestrian seating. 
c.  Exceptions to the four requirements are: 
1.  A project that utilizes a metal roof or veranda consistent with the period shall only be required to use to of the features above in addition to the period roof or veranda. 
2.  A project that utilizes both a period roof and a veranda will not be required to use any further features from the above list. 
(9)  Design requirements for Class I projects. 
a.  Site design and site preparation. Improvements to property shall be undertaken with careful consideration to natural features, including, but not limited to, topography, drainage, and vegetation. To the greatest extent possible, natural features shall be incorporated into site design. For example, on-site stormwater ponds shall be located in those portions of the site which naturally occur at lower elevations in order to minimize the amount of fill material necessary to elevate the property in order to achieve drainage. This example also illustrates how proper site design will compliment other goals of the Charlotte Harbor Community including the preservation of canopy trees. 
b.  Compatibility. Class I projects shall be compatible with the character of the Charlotte Harbor Community in terms of size, scale, design, materials, color and texture. 
c.  Contemporary designs. Contemporary designs shall complement and shall not conflict with the general requirements and specifications, period requirements, and design requirements. The distinction between contemporary and existing designs shall be and remain evident. Factors that shall be considered in blending contemporary with existing structures include, without limitation, size, pedestrian scale, relationship of building mass to adjacent structures, relationship to existing architectural details, elements, materials, color, texture and styles in the Charlotte Harbor Community, and similarity of window and door proportions. 
d.  Materials, textures, and colors. Exterior finishes in the Charlotte Harbor Community are wood or block/stucco with various types and colors of roofing materials. Roofing materials shall be consistent in appearance with the period. Class I projects shall establish a relationship with existing structures by utilizing the finishes and roofing materials required by this Code. 
e.  Height. There shall be a complementary relationship of height between Class I projects and existing adjacent structures. An attached exterior addition shall be located at the rear or on an inconspicuous side of a structure, limiting its size and scale in relationship to the building. 
f.  Additions. New additions shall not destroy features that characterize the property and shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
g.  Lighting. All street lighting, yard lighting, and, for commercial development, parking and vehicular circulation area lighting shall match the lighting standards used at the Bayshore Park and as shown on the adopted photos. Lighting shall be further designed, shielded, installed, or otherwise accomplished so as to contain all illumination within the development site. Exterior pole lighting shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Design requirements for Class II projects. 
a.  Site design and site preparation. Improvements shall be undertaken with careful consideration to natural features, including, but not limited to, topography, drainage, and vegetation. To the greatest extent possible, natural features shall be incorporated into site design. For example, on-site stormwater ponds shall be located in those portions of the site which naturally occur at lower elevations in order to minimize the amount of fill material necessary to elevate the property in order to achieve drainage. This example also illustrates how proper site design will compliment other goals of the Charlotte Harbor Community including the preservation of canopy trees. 
b.  Landscaping. Parking lots and vehicular circulation areas associated with commercial redevelopment shall be treated as new development and must be landscaped in accordance with the site design standards and requirements of this Code. This design requirement shall control and supersede any exemption afforded to existing paved parking areas from compliance with landscaping standards that are applied to new paved parking areas pursuant to the Off-street parking and loading facilities requirements of this Code. 
c.  Compatibility. Class II projects shall be compatible with the character of the Charlotte Harbor Community in terms of size, scale, design, materials, color and texture. 
d.  Contemporary designs. Contemporary designs shall complement and shall not conflict with the general requirements and specifications, period requirements, and design requirements. The distinction between contemporary and existing designs shall be and remain evident. Factors that shall be considered in blending contemporary with existing structures include, without limitation, size, pedestrian scale, relationship of building mass to adjacent structures, relationship to existing architectural details, elements, materials, color, texture and styles in the Charlotte Harbor Community, and similarity of window and door proportions. 
e.  Siting. Additions other than additional floors shall be located at the rear or on an inconspicuous side of a structure, limiting its size and scale in relationship to the building. 
f.  Height. There shall be a complementary relationship of height between additions that increase the height of the structures to which they are added and existing, adjacent structures. 
g.  Additions. New additions shall not destroy existing period features that characterize the property and shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
h.  Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be done in period style, and shall be further designed, shielded, installed, or otherwise accomplished so as to contain all illumination within the development site. Exterior pole lighting shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(11)  Design requirements for Class III projects. 
a.  General. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. While most properties change over time, it is the intention of this section that the character of properties undergoing reconstruction, rehabilitation, or to which additions are added be maintained through preservation of distinctive features, finishes, construction techniques, or examples of craftsmanship. 
b.  Scale. No existing structure shall be enlarged so that its proportions, particularly height, are out of scale with its surroundings. On any given block or area where a variety of sizes and styles exist, no structure shall surpass the majority of the structures in that area. Alterations shall be made in a manner that does not alter the scale of the streetscape. 
c.  Alterations. 
1.  The alteration of existing period features is prohibited unless the alteration is necessary to salvage the structure. Whenever possible, deteriorated period features that characterize a property shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a period feature, the new period feature shall match the old period feature in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence shall justify and substantiate the replacement of missing period features. 
2.  Exterior alterations and related new construction shall not destroy period features that characterize the property and shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the property and its environment would be unimpaired. New features shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features of existing features in order to protect the integrity of the structure, the property and the environment. 
3.  The removal or alteration of exterior spaces (such as porches, courtyards, etc.) that characterize a property is prohibited unless the removal or alteration is necessary to salvage the property or doing so enables the incorporation of period design elements. 
4.  The removal of period materials is prohibited unless the period materials are too deteriorated to repair. New period materials shall be utilized to replace deteriorated period materials. If new period materials are unavailable, modern building materials and techniques that are visually equivalent to the period materials shall be utilized. 
(12)  Design requirements for Class IV projects. 
a.  Fences and walls. Fences and walls are important elements of the design and character of a structure and district. 
1.  The scale and character of a fence and its posts and gates shall be compatible with the house and neighboring structures. 
2.  The height of fences and walls shall be governed by the fences and walls provisions of this Code. 
3.  The beginning point for six-foot fences shall be rearward from the point where the facade of the house joins the front porch, or a minimum of ten feet from the front property line. This shall not be construed to exempt applicants from having to obtain a variance as may be required by this Code regarding setback requirements from fences and walls. 
4.  All concrete walls shall be stuccoed and capped. 
5.  Unless approved by the BZA for another location by way of a special exception, chain-link fencing shall not be installed forward of the back walls of any structure. 
6.  Reed fencing is prohibited. 
7.  Fence structures erected within the required setback area (i.e. between the property line and the setback line) are subject to the same height restrictions as fences erected on the property line. 
b.  Vending booths, carts, and other merchandise displays. The use or storage of vending booths, carts, and other merchandise displays is prohibited in the front yard or side yard of any structure adjoining a public street (i.e. between the front or side facade and the public right-of-way or sidewalk), and are prohibited in public rights-of-way. Vending carts or booths shall be located only in or on the periphery of parking lots, where vending will not displace required parking, or otherwise vacant properties. Merchandise shall not be mounted or displayed on the exterior surface of the front facade. All vending machines shall be placed in kiosks or enclosures constructed in period style and materials. 
(13)  Pictures. The board has adopted a series of pictures that depict structures that reflect the period vernacular. By this reference, the pictures are made a part hereof. The pictures are available for public inspection through the county web site. The county reserves the right to add and remove photographs from the pictures, as the case may be, provided that a complete set of the pictures shall be made available for public inspection at the location provided above. The purpose of the pictures is to present visual examples of combinations of design features that result in structures that display the period vernacular. 
(14)  Definitions. 
Arch: A structural member shaped in the arc of a curve. 
Architrave: The lower part of a classical entablature, which rests on a column. 
Baluster: A post or upright supporting a handrail, often vase-shaped, a series of which makes up a balustrade. 
Balustrade: A banister, railing, handrail or barrier. 
Bargeboard: The decorative board attached to the projecting portion of a gable. 
Bracket: A support element under eaves, shelves, or other overhangs. 
Chamfer: The surface formed by cutting off a corner of a board or post; a bevel. 
Column: A vertical support generally consisting of a base, circular shaft and capital. 
Cornice: The horizontal molded projection at the top of a building or wall. 
Cresting: A light repeated ornament, incised or perforated, carried along the top of a wall or roof. 
Cupola: A spherical roof or dome-roofed structure built on top of a roof. 
Dormer: A vertical window set in a sloping roof or a roofed structure containing such a window. 
Eaves: The projecting overhang at the lower edge of a roof. 
Entablature: A horizontal part in a classical post and beam system composed of the cornice, frieze and architrave. 
Facade: The front or principal face of a building. 
Finial: An ornament at the top of a spire, gable or pinnacle. 
Frieze: The part of the entablature between the architrave and cornice; any sculptured or ornamented band in a building. 
Gable: The triangular portion of a wall between the enclosing lines of a sloping roof. 
Hip roof: A roof with four uniformly pitched sides. 
Lattice: A structure consisting of strips of metal or wood, crossed or interlaced to form regularly spaced openings. 
Lintel: A beam of any material used to span an opening (also known as an architrave). 
Louvre: A series of inclined slats in a vertical frame allowing ventilation without admitting rain. 
Moulding: A continuous decorative band that is either carved into or applied to the surface. 
Mullion: A vertical member that divides a window or separates one (1) window or door from another. 
Muntin: The wood or metal strips that divide a multipane window. 
Parapet: A low solid protective wall or railing along the edge of a roof or balcony. 
Period: The time periods that are distinguishable by the use of architectural patterns, features and designs that are consistent with the "old Florida" vernacular. 
Pediment: A wide, low-pitched gable above a portico or door. 
Porch: A covered structure or recessed space at the entrance of a building. 
Portico: A major porch, with a pedimented roof supported by columns. 
Rafter: Part of a wooden roof frame sloping down from the ridge to the eaves and establishing the pitch. 
Ridge: The highest point of the roof, running from end to end. 
Sash: A frame or window in which glass is set. 
Shutter tiebacks: Hardware used to secure open shutters. 
Specifications: The architectural patterns, features and designs that are consistent with the "old Florida" vernacular 
Stucco: A type of plasterwork, either coarse or fine, used for surfacing interior or exterior walls. 
Transom: A small window over a door or large window. 
Turret: A small slender tower usually set at the corner of a building, often containing a circular shaft. 
(Ord. No. 2016-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-026, § 1, 6-13-17; Ord. No. 2018-047, § 1(Exh. A), 11-13-18; Ord. No. 2022-005, § 1, 1-25-22) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-042, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 22, 2016, repealed former §§ 3-9-47—3-9-47.15, and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 3-9-47—3-9-47.15 pertained to the Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code and Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Area tax increment financing. See the Code Comparative Table at the end of Volume II for a listing of ordinances which amended these former sections. 

Sec. 3-9-47.1. - Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Area tax increment financing. 
(a)  Definitions. Unless specifically defined below or elsewhere in this Section, words and phrases used in this this section shall be ascribed a meaning which they have in common usage and which gives this Code its most reasonable application. 
Fund shall mean the Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Area Trust Fund. 
Increment(s) shall mean amounts taxing authorities are required to appropriate to the fund on an annual basis as determined by a formula set forth hereafter. 
Taxing authority(ies) shall mean the State of Florida, Charlotte County and any authority, special district (as defined in F.S. § 165.031(5) or other public body of the state, except a school district, library district, neighborhood improvement district created pursuant to the Safe Neighborhoods Act, metropolitan transportation authority, water management district created under F.S. § 373.069, a special district that levies ad valorem taxes on taxable real property in more than one (1) county or a special district the sole source or revenue of which is ad valorem taxes on the effective date of this Code [December 15, 2003]. 
(b)  Funding of community redevelopment trust fund. In accordance with F.S. § 163.387, the board hereby provides for the funding of the fund. Monies allocated to and deposited into the fund and monies earned by the fund are hereby appropriated to the agency for the purposes set forth in the plan and all other activities authorized by law. 
(c)  Annual appropriation of tax increment. 
(1)  The fund shall be funded in an annual amount that is not less than the increment of each taxing authority. 
(2)  The increment shall be determined and appropriated annually. The increment shall be an amount equal to 95 percent of the difference between: 
a.  The amount of ad valorem taxes levied each year by each taxing authority, exclusive of any amount from any debt service millage, on taxable real property within Charlotte Harbor; and 
b.  The amount of ad valorem taxes which would have been produced by the rate upon which the tax is levied each year by or for each taxing authority, exclusive of any amount from any debt service millage, upon the total of the assessed value of the taxable real property in Charlotte Harbor, as shown on the most recent assessment roll used in connection with the taxation of real property in Charlotte Harbor by each taxing authority prior to the effective date of this Code [December 15, 2003]. 
(d)  Obligation of taxing authorities to appropriate funds annually. 
(1)  Commencing on the effective date of this Code [December 15, 2003], each taxing authority shall appropriate a sum that is no less than the increment specified in this section to the fund by January 1 of each year. Except as provided below, the taxing authorities' obligation to annually appropriate the increments shall continue for so long as any indebtedness pledging increment revenues for the payment thereof is outstanding, but shall not exceed thirty (30) years. If the plan is amended, each taxing authority shall make the annual appropriation for a period not to exceed thirty (30) years from the date that the plan is amended. 
(2)  Any taxing authority that does not pay an annual increment to the fund by January 1 shall pay the fund a penalty of five percent of the outstanding increment together with one (1) percent interest thereon for each month that the increment is outstanding. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, Charlotte County's obligation to annually appropriate the increment shall continue until all loans, advances, and indebtedness, if any, and interest thereon, undertaken or incurred by the agency as a result of redevelopment in Charlotte Harbor have been paid. 
(e)  Fund implementation. 
(1)  Prior to the expenditure of any increment revenue, the recipient or the user of the revenue, the amount of the revenue to be expended, and the deadline for expenditure shall be specified. Each appropriation shall be reviewed every five (5) years. An appropriation shall be discontinued in the event that it is not renewed or approved for another five (5) years. 
(2)  Monies in the fund may be expended from time to time for the following purposes, when directly related to financing or refinancing of redevelopment in Charlotte Harbor pursuant to the plan: 
a.  Administrative and overhead expenses necessary or incidental to plan implementation. 
b.  Expenses of redevelopment, planning, surveys and financial analysis, including the reimbursement of Charlotte County or the agency for such expenses incurred before the plan was approved or adopted. 
c.  The acquisition of real property in Charlotte Harbor. 
d.  Capital projects approved by the board. 
e.  The clearance and preparation of any redevelopment area for redevelopment and relocation of site occupants as provided in F.S. § 163.370 of the Act. 
f.  The repayment of principal and interest or any redemption premium for loans, advances, bonds, bond anticipation notes and any other form of indebtedness. 
g.  All expenses incidental to or connected with the issuance, sale, redemption, retirement or purchase of agency bonds, bond anticipation notes or other forms of indebtedness including funding of any reserve, redemption or other fund or account provided for in the ordinance or resolution authorizing such bonds, notes or form of indebtedness. 
(3)  The agency shall establish and set up the fund and develop and promulgate rules, regulations, and criteria whereby the fund may be promptly and effectively administered. 
(4)  The agency shall establish and maintain books and records and adopt procedures to enable the agency to utilize monies in the fund for their stated purposes without undue delay. 
(5)  On the last day of the agency's fiscal year, any money remaining in the fund after payment of expenses shall be: 
a.  Returned to each taxing authority which paid the increment in the proportion that the amount of the payment of such taxing authority bears to the total amount paid into the fund by all taxing authorities within Charlotte Harbor for that year; 
b.  Used to reduce the amount of any indebtedness to which increment revenues are pledged; or 
c.  Deposited into an escrow account for the purpose of later reducing any indebtedness to which increment revenues are pledged. 
(f)  Fund management; independent audit. 
(1)  The agency shall be responsible for the receipt, custody, disbursement, accountability, management and proper application of all monies paid into the fund, subject to the relevant provisions of Florida law, the plan and this Code. 
(2)  The agency shall provide for an independent financial audit of the fund each fiscal year and a report of the audit. The report shall describe the amount and source of deposits into, and the amount and purpose of withdrawals from the fund during the fiscal year and the amount of principal and interest paid during the year on any indebtedness to which is pledged increment revenues and the remaining amount of the indebtedness. The agency shall provide a copy of the report to each taxing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-042, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-16; Ord. No. 2018-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-18) 
Sec. 3-9-48. - Enterprise Charlotte Airport Park (ECAP). 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the ECAP district is to create a mixed industrial and business oriented zoning district including the Punta Gorda Airport and surrounding lands. The provisions of this district are intended to enhance and promote economic development within its boundaries as well as within the county, and to provide for quality and consistency in design and development while still maintaining flexibility for market responsiveness. The ECAP district is also subject to applicable standards of the airport protection and land use compatibility overlay code of section 3-9-63. 
(b)  Definitions. In the absence of a definition in this section, words, terms, and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in section 3-9-2. In the event of conflict between these meanings and meanings provided elsewhere in the Code, the meanings provided in this section shall prevail. 
Building trades contractors: Destination-oriented service and subcontractors or construction-type companies, such as plumbing, electrical, roofing, pool construction, etc., for which space requirements are for the most part office and storage, with potentially some showroom area for the display of merchandise. 
Developments of countywide economic impact: Any development with greater than two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet of industrial or distribution center floor area. 
ECAP industrial or green industry: An establishment engaged in manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing of products using moderate amounts of partially processed and raw materials to produce items. These activities do not include storage of large volumes of highly flammable, toxic matter or explosive materials as a primary use. Green industry may be either a light or heavy industrial use. This term includes uses that: 1) research and develop new energy technologies, including hydrogen energy, biofuel energy, fuel cells and coal gasification power generation; 2) manufacture renewable energy equipment including solar panels, wind turbines, etc.; 3) generate energy from renewable sources, including solar energy, wind energy, biofuel energy, hydro energy, marine energy, geothermal energy; 4) produce a product that is widely accepted as "green" if the manufacture, assembly, and fabrication processes reduce production waste, reduce hazardous waste, provide for on-site material reuse, provide for improved work practices, and provide for efficient utilization of resources. This term includes industries that are recognized as green technology industries by Charlotte County's Locally Designated Targeted Industries list (Resolution 2010-119, as amended). All green industries should embrace the concepts of the EPA Pollution Prevention program. ECAP or green industrial activities are subject to industrial performance standards of section 3-9-75. 
Wholesale business: The sale of goods by an individual or firm, usually in large quantities and at lower prices, to another individual or firm for the purpose of resale. A business that sells goods in large quantities and at lower prices to an individual or firm for personal consumption, or even which sells such goods for both personal consumption as well as for resale will be considered a retail business. 
(c)  Permitted uses and structures (P). 
(1)  Commercial/retail (CR), subject to use standards listed in subsection 3-9-48(d): 
a.  Commercial parking. 
b.  Restaurants. 
c.  Business services. 
d.  Professional services. 
e.  Laundromats. 
f.  Assisted living facility or day care center, adult, six (6) or less (subject to airport compatibility standards of section 3-9-63). 
g.  Day care center, child. 
h.  Personal services. 
i.  Motor vehicle wash. 
j.  General retail sales and services (see section 3-9-61. for rules governing accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage). 
k.  Hotel, motel, inn. 
l.  Apparel and appliance sale and repair stores. 
m.  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle sales or rental, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
n.  Gas stations. 
o.  Class 3 laboratories. 
p.  Any other use which by reasonable implication would be similar to one (1) of the other uses listed in this category. 
(2)  Industrial (I): 
a.  Aircraft servicing and repairing, aircraft storage, air freight handling, airline catering services, aircraft hangars. 
b.  Heliports and helistops. 
c.  Building trades contractors. 
d.  Class 1 and 2 laboratories. 
e.  Heavy machinery and equipment sales, service, and rental. 
f.  Lumber. 
g.  Farm equipment sales and service. 
h.  Light manufacturing and assembly. 
i.  Dairy, grain, fruit, field crop, and vegetable processing. 
j.  Sawmill, machine shop. 
k.  Printing, lithographing, publishing, and similar establishments. 
l.  Service establishments catering to industry, telephone exchanges, business machine services. 
m.  ECAP industrial. 
n.  Green industry. 
o.  Research, testing facility. 
p.  Distribution center, wholesaling, warehousing. 
q.  Wholesale business. 
r.  Bulk storage of other than flammable liquids or explosive materials. 
s.  Any other use which by reasonable implication would be similar to one (1) of the other uses listed in this category. 
(3)  Office/governmental (O): 
a.  Terminal services, customs clearance, or flying charter services, sightseeing airplane services and flight instruction schools. 
b.  Professional services. 
c.  Business services. 
d.  Banks, financial services. 
e.  Essential services. (see section 3-9-71, essential services) 
f.  Vocational, trade, and business schools. 
g.  Mass transit station. 
h.  Medical and dental office, clinics. 
i.  Governmental uses and facilities. 
j.  Any other use which by reasonable implication would be similar to one (1) of the other uses listed in this category. 
(4)  Airport property (A): 
a.  Uses permitted on airport property are all uses per the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) approved Airport Master Plan. This includes: 
1.  Those uses customarily associated with the operation of an airport. 
2.  Non-aviation uses are also permitted on airport property outside the airport operations area. 
3.  Development within the airport operations area and all airside development is exempt from landscaping and building design standards. Development of non-aviation uses and all development otherwise outside the airport operations area on airport property is subject to the applicable commercial, industrial, office, or governmental standards for development, landscaping and building design. 
(5)  Agriculture (AG): The use of property for bona fide agricultural purposes is allowed and eligible for agricultural exemption as determined by the Charlotte County Property Appraiser, provided no swine shall be kept within one thousand (1,000) feet of a nonagricultural use. Allowable activities also include: silviculture, aquaculture and commercial citriculture, harvesting of timber, hatcheries, and any other use which by reasonable implication would be similar to one (1) of the other uses listed in this category. 
(6)  Conservation and natural resources (CN): public and private game preserves, fish and wildlife management areas, refuges, parks and open spaces, water conservation areas, reservoirs and control structures, drainage systems and water wells, limited educational facilities such as canoeing, hiking and nature study, and outdoor education, boating, swimming, fishing, diving, water skiing, surfboarding, wading and similar activities, boat docks and boat lifts, and any other use which by reasonable implication would be similar to one (1) of the other uses listed in this category. 
(d)  Use standards. 
(1)  Mix of uses. The following land use types and corresponding allowable amounts of acreage are independent guidelines to ensure a mix of industrial and business development in ECAP surrounding the Punta Gorda Airport property. These percentages and acreages apply to the corresponding land use type in the entire ECAP land area outside of Airport property. Applications for development approval shall identify and describe the land use type and corresponding amount of acreage for county staff to maintain the inventory of land uses and areas as they are approved. Uses on airport property, agricultural uses, and conservation and natural resource uses are allowed without regard to the mix of use guidelines. 

 
(2)  Commercial/retail use location criteria. To maintain the industrial, business and economic development intent of the ECAP district and to control the proliferation of other uses, the following location criteria are required for commercial/retail uses: 
a.  Commercial/retail uses are permitted on parcels that abut arterial or collector roadways and on parcels within one-quarter (¼) mile of intersections of arterial and collector roadways (measured from the arterial or collector road right-of-way line). If a qualifying parcel is subdivided, the created lots still qualify for commercial/retail use. 
b.  For properties that do not meet criterion (a) above, commercial/retail uses are allowed as follow: 
1.  Up to ten (10) percent of the land area of any subdivision may be designated for commercial/retail uses. 
2.  Up to ten (10) percent of any office or industrial building area may be designated for commercial/retail uses. 
c.  Alternative locations may be approved by special exception per section 3-9-6.2. Applicants must demonstrate that transportation facilities and access are adequate through traffic impact analysis and that proposed uses are viable according to a professional market demand study. 
(e)  Existing uses. The ECAP zoning district classification shall not render an existing use on that property as nonconforming, even if such existing use is not a principal permitted use or a permitted accessory use in the ECAP. Any such existing use shall be considered nonconforming, however, if any of the following occur: 
(1)  An existing nonresidential use shall be considered nonconforming if a valid local business tax receipt related to the use expires and is not renewed. The county shall allow a grace period not to exceed sixty (60) days between the expiration and renewal of an local business tax receipt for such use. If an local business tax receipt expires during a period of inactivity caused by a natural disaster or act of God, such as a fire, hurricane, or other natural disaster, the county shall not count the time which passes during which repairs are being made against the sixty-day grace period. If applications for the permits necessary to effect repairs are not received by the county within one hundred twenty (120) days of the cessation of the use, the use will be considered nonconforming. 
(2)  An existing residential use shall be considered nonconforming if, for any reason other than a natural disaster or act of God, such as a fire, hurricane or other natural disaster, the structure containing such residential use is declared substantially damaged by the building official. In cases where a residential use ceases due to the damage or destruction of a residential structure arising from a natural disaster or act of God, such as a fire, hurricane, or other natural disaster, the county shall allow the owner to apply for permits to effect repairs to the structure, during which time the existing residential use shall not be considered nonconforming. If applications for the permits necessary to effect repairs are not received by the county within one hundred twenty (120) days of the damage or destruction of the residential structure, the use will be considered nonconforming. 
(f)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses are also permitted in this district, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  An accessory use or structure which by reasonable implication would be related to and supportive of airport operations shall be considered a permitted accessory use. 
(2)  Crew quarters consisting of sleeping, kitchen, bath, and sanitary facilities for the accommodation of on-call personnel associated with uses that provide public or private emergency services (including but not limited to fire stations, emergency medical transportation, and similar uses) shall be considered permitted accessory uses. During times of emergency, the quartering of emergency personnel shall be considered a permitted accessory use. 
(3)  Outdoor storage of materials or vehicles or outdoor assembly that is subordinate to a principal use. The following criteria apply to outdoor storage and fleet parking, but do not apply to car rental fleets and aircraft parking or storage: 
a.  Outdoor storage or fleet parking or outdoor assembly must be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any property line, and additionally must not extend forward of the primary building façade, which is where a customer entrance fronts a right-of-way. 
b.  The outdoor storage or fleet parking or outdoor assembly shall be screened from view from the right-of-way with a minimum fifteen-foot wide buffer planted with four (4) canopy trees per one hundred (100) linear feet and a double staggered hedge row at least twenty-four (24) inches in height at time of planting and maintained at a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height within one (1) year of planting. For any property line abutting a residentially zoned or used property, a minimum six-foot wall is also required. 
c.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height over eight (8) feet shall be stored at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoned or used properties. 

d.  A deviation from these criteria may be granted upon a finding that alternative design, buffering or screening meets or exceed the intent of these criteria to obscure the outdoor storage or assembly from view of the right-of-way. 
(g)  Conditional uses and structures (C): For rules and regulations for any use designated as a conditional use or structure, see section 3-9-69 conditional uses and structures. 
(1)  Outdoor repair or construction as a principal use, subject to the following criteria: 
a.  No outdoor repair or construction is permitted within the required front setback. 
b.  The perimeter of the outdoor area shall be buffered with a minimum 15' wide buffer planted with four (4) trees per one hundred (100) linear feet and a double staggered hedge row at least twenty-four (24) inches in height at time of planting and maintained at a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height within one (1) year of planting. For any property line abutting a residentially zoned or used property, a minimum six-foot wall is also required. 
c.  For outdoor repair or construction that involves equipment or products that exceed eight (8) feet in height, the outdoor activity must be conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoned properties. 
(2)  Truck stops, subject to the following criteria: 
a.  The truck stop must be located at an intersection of two (2) streets; have frontage on Piper Road; and be located no greater than one-half (½) mile from Interstate 75 exits. 
b.  Truck fueling, scales, or other service amenities must be placed behind the leading edge of primary structure. 
c.  All truck parking must be located to the rear of the primary structure. 
d.  Only one (1) truck stop may be located at the corner of any intersection. 
e.  All street frontages of the primary structure must have primary customer entrances. 
f.  All façades facing these streets shall be primary façades, and such façades shall incorporate a minimum of four (4) of the design treatments established in section 3-5-506, Appearance, building mass and design treatments, as may be amended. 
g.  All truck parking, fueling, and service amenities facing such street frontage or adjacent to residentially zoned or used properties must be screened by a minimum of twenty-foot wide buffer with a six-foot tall decorated wall planted with five (5) canopy trees per one hundred (100) linear feet and a double staggered hedge row at least twenty-four (24) inches in height at time of planting and maintained at a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height within one (1) year of planting. One hundred (100) percent of the required plant material shall face streets, the property zoned or used for residential uses. 
(h)  Prohibited uses and structures. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by conditional use or special exception shall be unlawful in this district. Refer to the comprehensive plan for specific list of prohibited uses in ECAP, and refer to section 3-9-63 for prohibited uses associated with airport protection and land use compatibility. 
(i)  Special exceptions (S): (For procedure see section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions) 
(1)  Structures with heights in excess of ninety (90) feet, subject to the following standards for approval: 
a.  Airport compatibility. The applicant must demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact or effect as a result of such use to the Charlotte County Airport Authority property or to the operations of the Charlotte County Airport. The applicant must also demonstrate that a copy of the petition and notice of the hearing on the petition was provided to the Charlotte County Airport Authority and the Federal Aviation Administration at its Airports District Office in Orlando, Florida. 
b.  Light attenuation. The applicant must demonstrate that all outside lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare, light spillage, or hazardous interference with aircraft operation and flight patterns. 
(2)  Commercial/retail uses that do not meet the location criteria of section 3-9-48(d)(2) may be approved by special exception per section 3-9-6.2. Applicants must demonstrate that transportation facilities and access are adequate through a traffic impact analysis and that proposed uses are viable according to a professional market demand study. 
(3)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
a.  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
b.  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
c.  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The BZA shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6, board of zoning appeals. 
(j)  Development standards. The following development standards apply to all development in ECAP. 

 
(k)  Landscaping standards. The following landscaping standards apply to all development in ECAP, except that development within the airport operations area and all airside development is exempt from these landscaping standards. Development of non-aviation uses and all development otherwise outside the airport operations area on airport property is subject to the applicable standards, and subject to provisions of subsection (2) below. 
(1)  Buffer requirements. Minimum buffer requirements are identified in the table below. Within ECAP, buffer trees must be canopy trees that are not bird attracting species for compatibility with the airport. Hedge rows must be planted at twenty-four (24) inches in height and maintained at a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height within one (1) year of planting, with shrub species that are not bird attractants for compatibility with the airport. 

 
(2)  All landscaping for parking areas shall comply with the provisions of section 3-9-100 including non-aviation development on airport property (development within the airport operations area and all airside development is exempt). To minimize wildlife attractants, Charlotte County Airport Authority is allowed to locate the landscaping required for landside parking areas elsewhere on airport property or within public right-of-way within the ECAP district in lieu of the parking area landscaping requirements, subject to site plan review and approval. 
(3)  Building perimeter plantings shall be located adjacent to the primary building facade to the maximum extent possible, including building entrance areas, plazas, and courtyards. These areas shall be landscaped with any combination of trees, palms, shrubs and ground covers. The building perimeter shall be planted in the amount of one hundred (100) square feet of planting area per one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of building ground floor area. Planting areas shall be raised or ground level and be a minimum of eight (8) feet wide. Seating courtyards, eating areas and plazas may be incorporated within the planting areas. The portion of the building(s) consisting of distribution, loading and industrial facilities and buildings in the airport operations area and airside buildings on airport property are excluded from this standard. 
(l)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85. 
(m)  Design standards. 
(1)  Commercial, retail, and office uses are subject to commercial design standards under section 3-5-501 of this code. Development within the airport operations area and all airside development is exempt from these design standards. Development of non-aviation uses and all development otherwise outside the airport operations area on airport property is subject to the applicable building design standards. 
(2)  Government and industrial uses are subject to the design standards listed below to support quality of appearance within the ECAP district. Development within the airport operations area and all airside development is exempt from these design standards. Development of non-aviation uses and all development otherwise outside the airport operations area on airport property is subject to the applicable building design standards. 
a.  Building orientation must provide for the main entrances facing the abutting street, or at least one (1) of the abutting streets in the case of corner lots. 
b.  The building's primary facade must provide for a point of entry that is articulated with an awning or other functional design element that is architecturally compatible and provides shade and protection from climate. 
c.  Corner lots at the intersection of road rights-of-way shall incorporate corner gateway treatments while maintaining safe visibility triangles for ingress and egress. Inclusion of any one (1) of the following criteria shall fulfill this requirement: 
1.  Developments or buildings may utilize a corner tower element. 
2.  A landscape mass [minimum four (4) trees of overall height at planting of eighteen (18) feet and one hundred (100) square feet of landscaping at base of landscape mass] may be planted at the corner to create a landscaped tower. 
3.  Landscape markers [minimum of four (4) and not less than six (6) feet in height] may be utilized. 
4.  A hardscape structure like a trellis or a monument sign with dimensional qualities that are greater than three (3) inches for a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the road faced signage (meeting county standards) located in the corner to create a threshold element, may be incorporated at the corner creating a landmark. 
5.  Exceptions. Development of individual lots within a platted subdivision will not be required to meet the gateway feature requirements, provided the platted subdivision contains a perimeter screen around the entire perimeter of the subdivision (excluding access rights-of-way to the subdivision) that meets the requirements contained in section 3-9-48(k); and provided further, that each entryway into the platted subdivision provides a gateway feature that meets these design intent/objective and criteria. 
d.  Service, loading, refuse and equipment areas shall be located at the rear or sides of buildings and obscured from the view of rights-of-way. These areas shall be designed to accommodate all backing and maneuvering on-site without encroachment into a road travel lane. Refuse storage and collection areas shall be fully enclosed. Enclosures shall be constructed of concrete block and finished to match the primary building's design, or be finished with stucco, and painted the same base color as the main building. Enclosures shall be provided with opaque, painted steel, aluminum or wood gates and designed to be subject to abuse without short-term deterioration. 
e.  Exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from ground view on all sides by a screening device, such as a screen wall or parapet wall for roof mounted equipment or landscaping or structural screening that is aesthetically compatible with the design of the building or the landscape for ground mounted equipment. Equipment screening shall be at least the height of the exterior components to be screened. Equipment screening should occur as monolithic unit(s) versus several small individual screens. These mechanical equipment screening requirements do not apply to small fans, vent stacks, or other small equipment of similar size. 
f.  Overhead doors shall not be located on the primary facade facing or visible from rights-of-way. If there is a demonstrated need which dictates the placement of an overhead door on the primary facade, the appearance must be minimized by clustering trees within the right-of-way buffer to obscure direct view of the door and by blending it into the primary facade of the structure. Blending shall be accomplished by painting the overhead door the same color as the primary facade and by either recessing that portion of the primary facade containing the overhead door by three (3) feet or by a combination of recessing the primary facade and eave overhang. 
g.  Building materials are restricted as follows: 
1.  Metal panels, plastic siding and/or tiles shall not be used to cover more than fifty (50) percent of any primary facade except that siding may be used to cover more than fifty (50) percent of a primary facade when it is necessary to achieve a recognizable architectural theme approved by the zoning official. 
2.  Smooth faced concrete on a primary facade shall have a cementitious exterior coating (the visual equivalent of stucco or some other decorative finish such as split faced block). Untreated concrete block is not an acceptable finished material for primary facades. 
h.  Pedestrian access and walkways shall provide for internal connections on the site and for connection to any existing public sidewalks abutting the site. 
i.  Minimum off-street parking and loading spaces requirements are outlined in section 3-9-79. 
(n)  Deviations. Proposed deviations from or alternatives to design standards within the ECAP district must be submitted for review by the zoning official. The zoning official may approve the deviation or alternative design per the following criteria: 
(1)  Minor deviations from the dimensional standards which amount to no more than ten (10) percent of the requirements or one (1) foot, whichever is greater may be granted an administrative variance pursuant to the process laid out in section 3-9-6.3(I) of the Charlotte County Code. 
(2)  For architectural deviations or other similar deviations, the zoning official may approve alternative designs on such sites which do not meet the letter of this article, but nonetheless result in efficient, aesthetically pleasing development in harmony with structures already existing on the site and which do not detract from the appearance of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2003-067, § 2, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 2004-050, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2008-055, § 1, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 2011-015, § 1, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2011-042, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-002, § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-18; Ord. No. 2021-034, § 1, 10-12-21) 
Sec. 3-9-49. - U.S. 41 zoning district overlay. 
(a)  Short title. The short title of this section 3-9-49 shall be the U.S. 41 Zoning District Overlay Code (the "overlay code"). 
(b)  Boundary. The area affected by this overlay code shall be the U.S. 41 commercial corridor which is generally located west of U.S. 41 from the Sarasota County line to Gardner Drive and on the east side of U.S. 41 from the Sarasota County line to Hancock Avenue, excluding the Murdock Village Redevelopment Area and Murdock Development of Regional Impact (the "corridor"). The location of the boundary of the corridor is delineated in exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance No. 2008-082 which by this reference is adopted into and declared to be a part of this section 3-9-49. 
(c)  Applicability. The overlay code shall apply to development and/or redevelopment of commercial, office, and residential uses within the corridor and all other matters referenced in the overlay code. The terms development and/or redevelopment shall be construed liberally and shall include any plat, special exception, variance, development review committee approval, site plan approval, building or sign permit, or any other official action of Charlotte County that has the effect of permitting development and/or redevelopment or any application for any of the preceding. The overlay code apply shall apply to the preceding matters notwithstanding the application of another provision(s) of the County Code to said matter(s). In the event of a conflict between another provision of the County Code and the overlay code, the terms of the overlay code shall supersede and control. 
(d)  Intent. The overlay code is designed to enhance the corridor and is critical to the promotion of an appealing and attractive image of the county for the benefit of its residents and visitors. Towards this end, the intent of the overlay code is to: 
(1)  Promote the development and redevelopment of commercial and office uses in order to ensure a lasting and favorable visual impression along and within the corridor, enhance the corridor's overall appearance and improve its functional operation. 
(2)  Reinforce Charlotte County's Comprehensive Plan by modifying specific permitted and prohibited uses of underlying zoning districts and establishing new standards for development. 
(3)  Protect the properties that adjoin the corridor from adverse impacts of intensive activity within and along the corridor. 
(4)  Invigorate the economic and social vitality of the corridor. 
(5)  Protect the unique character of the existing single-family residential communities located behind the corridor. 
(6)  Provide for a compatible mixture of residential, neighborhood business, and commercial and office uses to serve Charlotte County's residents and visitors. 
(7)  Improve the character of and prevent the permanent decline of property within the corridor by controlling nuisances and ensuring that land uses which may contribute to the degradation of the community and possible criminal activity will not be located near residential areas. 
(8)  Design and place different land uses, buildings, streets, and other amenities (such as sidewalks and street lights) within the corridor to ensure that the public's health, welfare, and safety are protected. 
(e)  Permitted and prohibited uses. Permitted and prohibited uses are based upon existing land use classifications in the Charlotte County, Florida Comprehensive Plan ("comprehensive plan") and existing zoning districts within the County Code. 
(1)  The following permitted and prohibited uses apply to the U.S. 41 overlay mixed use, commercial corridor, commercial center, low intensity industrial and public lands and facilities future land use map (FLUM) designations in the comprehensive plan: 
a.  The following permitted and prohibited uses and structures shall apply to lots that are fronting U.S. 41 and to those that are not fronting U.S. 41 but were zoned for commercial or industrial use as of the date of the adoption of the overlay code on November 9, 2004: 
1.  Commercial general. The overlay code shall not affect permitted principal uses and structures, permitted accessory uses and structures, conditional uses, prohibited uses and structures, and special exceptions within subsections 3-9-42(b) through (f) of the commercial general (CG) zoning district. 
2.  Planned development. The overlay code shall not affect permitted principal uses and structures, permitted accessory uses and structures, prohibited uses and structures within an approved plan adopted pursuant to section 3-9-45 of the planned development (PD) zoning district. 
3.  Office, medical, and institutional. The overlay code shall not affect permitted principal uses and structures, permitted accessory uses and structures, conditional uses, prohibited uses and structures and special exceptions within section 3-9-39 of the office, medical, and institutional (OMI) zoning district. 
4.  Industrial general. The overlay code shall not affect permitted principal uses and structures, permitted accessory uses and structures, conditional uses, and prohibited uses and structures in the existing industrial general (IG), section 3-9-43, zoning district. However, no special exception uses in the industrial general (IG) zoning district shall be permitted on properties located within the U.S. 41 Zoning District Overlay. 
b.  Businesses that face and are adjacent to U.S. 41 will be allowed to expand onto an adjoining rear lot(s) only if the rear lot(s) is designated with a commercial corridor or U.S. 41 overlay mixed use FLUM. The preferred zoning districts are CG, OMI and PD. Subsequent to such expansion, residential roads located adjacent to the expanded business shall not be utilized for ingress to or egress from said business unless an overriding need can be demonstrated. A minimum type D buffer (section 3-9-100) with a wall shall be required alongside any rear or side property line that borders residential zoning or uses. The following standards shall apply to development of a rear lot. 
1.  Uses and structures in the commercial general zoning district, subsection 3-9-42 (b) (c), (d) and (f) are allowed as permitted principal uses, or conditional uses or special exception uses according to the commercial general zoning district regulations in section 3-9-42. 
2.  Uses and structures in the office medical institutional zoning district, subsection 3-9-39(b) (c), (d) and (f) are allowed as permitted principal uses, or conditional uses or special exception uses according to the office medical institutional zoning district regulations in section 3-9-39. 
3.  A mix of commercial and residential uses or multi-family residential is allowed only in a PD zoning district, according to section 3-9-45. Residential uses are only allowed through approval of transfer of density units (Article XX sections 3-5-431 to 3-5-435 Charlotte County Code). 
c.  Commercial and multi-family residential uses not associated with an existing business can develop on a rear lot(s) but only if the rear lot(s) is located within a commercial corridor or U.S. 41 overlay mixed use FLUM. The preferred zoning districts are CG, OMI and PD. 
1.  Uses and structures in the commercial general zoning district, subsection 3-9-42(b) (c), (d) and (f) are allowed as permitted principal uses, or conditional uses or special exception uses according to the commercial general zoning district regulations in section 3-9-42. 
2.  Uses and structures in the office medical institutional zoning district, subsection 3-9-39(b) (c), (d) and (f) are allowed as permitted principal uses, or conditional uses or special exception uses according to the office medical institutional zoning district regulations in section 3-9-39. 
3.  A mix of commercial and residential uses or multi-family residential is allowed only in a PD zoning district, according to section 3-9-45. Residential uses are only allowed through approval of transfer of density units (Article XX sections 3-5-431 to 3-5-435 Charlotte County Code). 
4.  Signs: Signs shall be in accordance with section 3-9-85, Charlotte County Code, and this code. Provisions of this article shall take precedence. Signs must contribute to the sense of design and place of the development through the use of graphics, color, material and placement. 
(i)  Only monument signs and wall signs shall be allowed. There shall be a maximum of one (1) monument sign per right-of-way frontage and it shall be located at the project entrance(s). 
(ii)  The maximum size of the monument sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The maximum wall signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
(iii)  Signs shall not be internally lighted. Ground lights shall be screened from view with shrubs. 
(iv)  The monument sign structure shall be constructed of the same material as the predominant material of the principal building. 
(v)  The monument sign and wall sign shall be constructed of the same color as the predominant color of the principal building. 
(vi)  Wall signs shall not cover architectural features or details and not extend beyond the roof line or outer edges of the building. 
(vii)  Windows shall not be used for advertising purposes. Windows may permanently display the proprietor's' name, business name, and property address for identification purposes only. Signs placed inside of a window with the intent of being seen from the outside are prohibited. 
5.  Parking: Businesses are required to provide employee and customer parking according to section 3-9-79 of the County Code. Parking within rights-of-way is prohibited. Buffering along front lot lines of a parking area will be a minimum type B buffer (section 3-9-100) with a wall, except for site triangles at ingress and egress entrances. 
6.  A building that locates on the rear lot(s) must be designed so as to emulate a residential structure. 
7.  A minimum type B buffer (section 3-9-100) with a wall shall be required along any side property line that borders residential zoning or uses. 
(2)  Development within the low or medium density residential FLUM designations shall comply with sections 3-9-33 (RSF-3.5) or 3-9-34 (RMF-10) of the County Code, as applicable. 
(3)  The following standards shall apply to the U.S. 41 overlay mixed use FLUM designation in the comprehensive plan: 
a.  Commercial development shall comply with subsection 3-9-49. 
b.  Residential development. 
1.  Only multi-family residential uses are allowed. 
2.  Minimum multi-family density is five (5) units per acre, maximum multi-family density is fifteen (15) units per acre. 
3.  The development standards shall comply with this section. 
4.  Residential development must meet the requirements of Article XX, sections 3-5-431 to 3-5-435 regarding transfers of density units. 
5.  A minimum type B buffer (section 3-9-100) with a wall shall be required alongside any side property line that borders single-family residential zoning or uses. 
c.  A mix of commercial and residential uses or multi-family residential is allowed only in a PD zoning district, section 3-9-45. Residential uses are only allowed through approval of transfer of density units (Article XX sections 3-5-431 to 3-5-435 Charlotte County Code). 
(4)  Rezoning to commercial neighborhood, commercial tourist, industrial general, and industrial intensive are prohibited. 
(5)  The twenty-five-foot PD setback requirement will be waived for development in the overlay. The minimum setback shall follow the development standards of this code; however, greater setbacks may be required when the site plan is reviewed. 
(6)  The existing single-family residences shall be considered legally conforming uses as the date of the adoption of the overlay code. 
(f)  Development standards. 
(1)  Properties immediately adjacent to U.S. 41, not served by an access road and that are located within commercial general (CG) or office, medical and institutional (OMI) zoning districts shall comply with the development standards that apply to the zoning district within which the properties are located. 
(2)  Properties within planned development (PD), and industrial general (IG) zoning districts shall comply with the development standards that apply to the zoning district within which the properties are located irrespective of whether the property is served by an access road. 
(3)  All properties within the overlay shall comply with the following development standards: 
a.  Front lots facing U.S. 41 with no expansion to rear lots. 

 
b.  Front lot(s) facing U.S. 41 with expansion to rear lot (such exceptions shall be considered a unified development). 
1.  Front and rear lot unified standards: 
(i)  Maximum lot coverage for commercial and residential uses in total, sixty (60) percent. 
(ii)  Development on the front lots(s) may expand to cover one hundred (100) percent of that lot(s) but total coverage for the unified development cannot exceed sixty (60) percent. 
(iii)  Floor area ratio for commercial and residential uses in total shall not exceed 1.2. 
2.  Front Lot(s) standards: 

 
3.  Rear lot(s) standards: 

 
c.  Rear lot(s) development, with no expansion from the front: 

 
(g)  Parking. If the county has provided or will provide public parking, businesses which develop or redevelop on a lot facing U.S. 41 or which are expanding to a rear lot are not required to provide customer parking; however, the business shall provide employee parking on-site which must be placed on the rear of the lot(s). Otherwise, businesses shall be required to provide employee and customer parking according to section 3-9-79 of the County Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(1)  Within the U.S. 41 overlay mixed use FLUM, off-street parking of the residential development shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(h)  Commercial design standards. All commercial and office development and redevelopment shall be in accordance with the commercial design standards set forth in sections 3-5-501 through 3-5-516 of the County Code, as the same may be amended, except that metal paneled buildings are not permitted. Metal buildings constructed prior to the effective date of the overlay code shall be allowed to remain as a non-conforming use as provided in section 3-9-9 of the County Code. Commercial buildings that are developed on rear lots and which are not part of a unified expansion from a front lot must emulate a residential structure. 
(i)  Solid Waste. Dumpsters, compactors and recycling dumpsters shall be in accordance with article VI, sections 1-12-113 through 1-12-119, of the County Code, as the same may be amended. Refuse collection and equipment or refuse storage areas shall be located at the rear of the property. These areas shall maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any lot line. 
(j)  Landscaping. Landscape buffers and screening shall be required within the Corridor in accordance with this section or the provisions of sections 3-9-100.1 through 3-9-100.3 of the County Code, whichever is more restrictive. 
(k)  Signs. Signs in the corridor shall be governed by this section or section 3-9-85 of the County Code, whichever is more restrictive. 
(l)  Outdoor Lighting. Outdoor lighting in rear lot(s) must be shielded or directed in such a way that the light does not shine beyond the boundaries of the subject property. Pole or standing lights will be no higher than ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-065, § 1, 11-9-04; Ord. No. 2005-040, § 1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 2006-085, § 1, 10-17-06; Ord. No. 2008-082, § 1, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2017-028, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-17) 
Sec. 3-9-50. - Manasota and Sandpiper Key zoning district overlay. 
(a)  Definitions. When terms are defined both in this section 3-9-50 and elsewhere in the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida ("Code"), definitions for such terms in this subsection shall control. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection: 
Advisory committee shall mean the Manasota and Sandpiper Key Advisory Committee established by the Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, Florida ("board") on October 12, 2004, pursuant to Resolution Number 2004-212. 
Appurtenances shall mean something added to another, more important thing on a building that is customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal building. 
Building setback calculation shall mean the methodology used in the Manasota and Sandpiper Key zoning district overlay ("overlay code") to determine the stepped setback required from the property line for a building based on building height and stepped setback calculation points. 
Design requirements shall mean the architectural design requirements provided for by the overlay code that shall regulate the design of new construction and the repair, rehabilitation or remodeling of existing structures on Manasota and Sandpiper Keys. 
Driveway shall mean a permeable surface designed for use by vehicles that connect a road to a structure. 
Driveway crossover shall mean that portion of a driveway located on a setback. 
Height, building or structure in this Code shall mean the distance from zero (0) feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. 
Highest constructed element shall mean the highest point of a building or the highest point of any rooftop livable space or appurtenances thereto. 
Manasota and Sandpiper Key Overlay Code shall mean the Manasota and Sandpiper Key zoning district overlay code established by section 3-9-50 and as amended into the Code. 
Manasota commercial general or MCG shall mean the commercial general zoning district established by the overlay code. 
Manasota commercial tourist or MCT shall mean the commercial tourist zoning district established by the overlay code. 
Manasota environmentally sensitive or MES shall mean the environmentally sensitive zoning district established by the overlay code. 
Manasota Key shall mean the land located south of the Sarasota-Charlotte County line, west of Sandpiper Key, north of Stump Pass Beach State Park and east of the Gulf of Mexico. 
Manasota multifamily or MMF shall mean the multifamily zoning districts established by the overlay code. 
Manasota planned development or MPD shall mean the planned development zoning district established by the overlay code. 
Manasota single-family or MSF shall mean the single-family zoning district established by the overlay code. 
Maximum building height within the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay district shall mean the building height as measured from zero (0) feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. 
Maximum building height calculation means the height of a building measured from zero (0) NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element which is the highest point of a building or the highest point of any rooftop livable space or appurtenances thereto. 
Minimum finished floor elevation shall mean the lowest floor for which a building permit may be issued which on Manasota Key in the A-zones is the minimum lowest floor elevation or base flood elevation (BFE); and in the V-zone (governed by Florida DEP seaward of the coastal construction control line (CCCL)) is the least horizontal shore parallel structural member plus the thickness of the structure which for this overlay code shall be a vertical measurement of thirty (30) inches from the lowest horizontal structural member (LHSM). 
NGVD shall mean the National Geodetic Vertical Datum on the effective date of this overlay code. 
Overlay code shall mean the Manasota and Sandpiper Key zoning district overlay code established by this section 3-9-50. 
Peripheral landscape strip shall mean the required green open area of at least ten (10) feet in width located immediately adjacent and parallel to all sides of the lot boundary that is free of encroachments. The ten-foot wide green open area is a vegetated landscape strip. Vegetated landscaping means grass, ground cover, mulch, shrubs, vines, hedges, synthetic pervious turf, and/or trees. Synthetic pervious turf shall consist of pervious material on a manufacturer approved pervious base made of impervious material. Bases such as concrete or asphalt are not permitted. Synthetic pervious turf must be installed according to relevant manufacturer specifications. Sand infill is required. The synthetic pervious turf shall mimic the color of natural grass; other colors are prohibited. 
Pervious pavers shall mean pervious, porous, or permeable pavers with pavers systems that meets or exceeds a product infiltration rate of three (3) inches per hour and absorbed onsite. 
Plan shall mean the Manasota Community Plan as accepted by the board on September 21, 2004, and as it may be amended from time to time. 
Rooftop livable space shall mean all usable areas upon or above the roof of a building including but not limited to decks, swimming pools, walls, fences and railings. 
Sandpiper Key shall mean the land area located south and west of the Intracoastal Waterway, east of the Lemon Bay Channel and north of Manasota Key. 
Setback shall mean the minimum horizontal distance between the road, rear or side lot lines and the front, rear or side lines of the building. 
Sidewalk shall mean a linear surface within and adjacent to or outside and alongside the boundary of a public or private thoroughfare that is designed for use by pedestrians. 
Structure shall mean any construction or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. "Structure" includes "building," as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the ground or requiring construction or erection on the ground. 
Structure height. See "height, structure" above. 
Walkway shall mean a linear surface utilized by pedestrians for passage over dunes and other beach areas. 
(b)  Establishment; short title. The Manasota and Sandpiper Key zoning district overlay code is hereby established. The short title of this section shall be "Manasota and Sandpiper Key Overlay Code." 
(c)  Intent. The intent of the Manasota and Sandpiper Key Overlay Code is to implement the goals, objectives, and policies of the Manasota Key Community Plan to preserve and protect the existing low-density development and to blend future development with it in an appropriate manner. 
(d)  Boundary. The area affected by the Manasota and Sandpiper Key Overlay Code shall be the area depicted as Manasota and Sandpiper Key on Smart Charlotte 2050 FLUM Series Map #9: Barrier Island Overlay District. 
(e)  Applicability; conflict with other ordinances. The overlay code shall apply to development and redevelopment on the islands together with all other matters referenced in the overlay code. The terms "development" and "redevelopment" shall be construed liberally and shall include any plat, special exception, variance, waiver, site plan approval, building or sign permit, or any other official action of Charlotte County that has the effect of permitting development and/or redevelopment or any application for any of the preceding matters. The overlay code shall apply to the preceding matters notwithstanding the application of another provision(s) of the Code to said matters. Except where expressly provided herein, the terms of the overlay code shall supersede and control in the event and to the extent of a conflict between the overlay code and another provision of the Code. 
Zoning Districts 
The following zoning districts are the only zoning districts permitted within the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay district and shall only be permitted in the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay district. 
(1)  Open space and rural districts. 
Manasota environmentally sensitive (MES). 
(2)  Residential districts. 
Manasota single-family 1 (MSF-1). 
Manasota single-family 3.5 (MSF-3.5). 
Manasota single-family 5 (MSF-5). 
Manasota multifamily 7.5 (MMF-7.5). 
Manasota multifamily 10 (MMF-10). 
Manasota multifamily 12 (MMF-12). 
(3)  Commercial districts. 
Manasota commercial general (MCG). 
Manasota commercial tourist (MCT). 
(4)  Special districts. 
Manasota planned development (MPD). 
(f)  Intent of Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay districts. 
(1)  The intent of the MES district is to preserve and protect certain land and water areas which have overriding ecological, hydrological, or physiographic importance to the public at large. It is intended to preserve and protect open spaces, park lands, wilderness areas, marshlands, watersheds and water recharge areas, scenic areas, beaches and native flora and fauna. It is intended to allow limited public/private recreational/educational uses and their incidental accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  The intent of the MSF district is to provide single-family residential dwellings and for other uses normally associated with single-family residential dwellings. Nothing herein is intended to prevent the grouping of lots or parcels for residential single-family uses. 
(3)  The intent of the MMF district is to provide low or medium-density residential districts with emphasis on multifamily use. There are variations among the MMF districts in requirements which include differing lot areas, width, yards and uses. 
(4)  The intent of MCG district is to provide areas in which the customary and traditional conduct of trade, retail sales and commerce may be carried on without disruption by the encroachment and intrusion of incompatible residential uses and protected from the adverse effects of undesirable industrial uses. 
(5)  The intent of the MCT district is to permit the designation of suitable locations for and to facilitate the proper development and use of land for the commercial provision of accommodations and services for tourists and other visitors and short-term or seasonal residents. The term "accommodations" is intended to include housing and various amenities, including recreational facilities and local retail trade in goods and service both general and specific to the locality/tourist attraction or principal activities. Areas designated MCT are expected to be located near or adjacent to a tourist attraction such as Gulf of Mexico beach frontage, major public or private parks, and other recreational or scenic resources. 
(6)  The intent of the MPD district is to retain standards that maintain current densities and zoning districts consistent with the goals of the Manasota Key community plan and provide standards for new planned developments. 
(g)  District development standards. 
(1)  Open space and rural district standard. The following numerical requirements apply subject to the provisions below. 

 
a.  Only one (1) driveway crossover is permitted within the front yard setback. 
b.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-three (43) feet for MSF zones landward of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection coastal construction control line ("CCCL") as measured from zero (0) feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
c.  The property shall be maintained in natural vegetation rather than landscaped. 
d.  Temporary portable structures and mobile homes shall be prohibited in this district. 
(2)  Residential district standards. 
a.  Single-family. The following numerical requirements apply subject to the provisions below. 

 
1.  All setbacks (front, side, and rear) are subject to the stepped setback provisions set forth under the development standards, section (i)(8) of this overlay code. Stepped setbacks are a function of building height. 
2.  Side and rear yards that abut any water but the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least twenty (20) feet, and those that abut the Gulf of Mexico (GM) shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
3.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet for all MSF zones seaward of the Florida DEP coastal construction control line (CCCL) and forty-three (43) feet for MSF zones landward of the CCCL as measured from zero feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
4.  All properties shall have front, side and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. Peripheral landscape strip and parking standards are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. Parking and driveway requirements are specified under the architectural standards of this overlay code. 
5.  All non-conforming lots less than seventy (70) feet in width or less than the district minimum lot area required shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. 
6.  All new development and any improvement to an existing development that totals over one thousand (1,000) square feet of pervious pavers shall be required to submit a drainage plan that shows how the pervious system meets or exceeds a product infiltration rate of three (3) inches per hour and absorbed onsite; and minimal subgrade slope not to exceed one (1) percent for parking, vehicular traffic areas and patios. 
7.  Accessory structures are also subject to other applicable provisions in this overlay code including: (h) permitted uses, (i)(11) development standards, and (k)(6) architectural design standards. 
b.  Multifamily. The following numerical requirements apply subject to the provisions below. 

 
1.  All setbacks (front, side, and rear) are subject to the stepped setback provisions set forth under the development standards, section (i)(8) of this [overlay] code. Stepped setbacks are a function of building height. 
2.  Side and rear yards that abut any water but the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet, and those that abut the Gulf of Mexico (GM) shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
3.  No stormwater management systems shall be located within the peripheral landscape strip. No side yard setback areas shall contain conventional stormwater detention ponds. 
4.  Maximum building height shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet for all MMF zones seaward of the Florida DEP Coastal construction control line (CCCL) and forty-eight (48) feet for MMF zones landward of the CCCL as measured from zero (0) feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
5.  All properties shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. Peripheral landscape strip and parking standards are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. Parking and driveway requirements are specified under architectural standards of this overlay code. 
6.  All non-conforming lots less than eighty (80) feet in width or less than the district minimum lot area required shall have front, side and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. 
7.  For multi-family structures on non-conforming MMF lots fifty (50) feet wide or less, the owner may request an administrative waiver of up to twenty (20) percent of the side setback (two (2) feet on each side) to redress hardships associated with meeting driveways and parking requirements for multifamily development. Waiver limits are contained in the development standards of this overlay code. 
c.  Commercial district standards. 

 
Note 1. MCT commercial lots eighty-five (85) feet or less in depth shall utilize the eighteen-foot front yard standard of the MCG zoning district. All others shall meet the twenty-five-foot front yard standards of the MCT commercial zone. 
Note 2. MCT residential lots fifty (50) feet wide or less may apply for a twenty (20) percent administrative side setback waiver in hardship cases. 
Note 3. On MCT mixed use lots, first floor MCT commercial use setback shall be twenty (20) feet from the bay and upper floor MCT residential setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet from the bay. 
1.  Manasota commercial general (MCG). 
i.  All setbacks (front, side, and rear) are subject to the stepped setback provisions set forth under the development standards, section (i)(8) of this [overlay] code. Stepped setbacks are a function of building height. 
ii.  Side and rear yards that abut any water but the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least twenty (20) feet, and those that abut the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
iii.  Setbacks abutting property zoned residential shall be equal to twenty-five (25) feet. 
iv.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet for all MCG zones seaward of the CCCL and forty-three (43) feet for MCG zones landward of the CCCL as measured from zero feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
v.  All properties shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. Peripheral landscape strip and parking standards are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
vi.  All MCG lots, including nonconforming less than one hundred (100) feet in width or less than the district minimum lot area required shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. 
2.  Manasota commercial tourist (MCT). 
i.  This district is a mixed-use district. Commercial and residential uses are permitted and the site may be entirely commercial, entirely residential, or mixed use, using the appropriate development standards. 
ii.  Setbacks. 
a)  All setbacks (front, side, and rear) are subject to the stepped setback provisions set forth under the development standards, section (i)(8) of this [overlay] code. Stepped setbacks are a function of building height. 
b)  Side and rear yards that abut any water but the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet, and those that abut the Gulf of Mexico shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
iii.  Setbacks for MCT-commercial and MCT-mixed use abutting property zoned residential shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
iv.  Setback calculation provisions are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
v.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet of structure height for MCT-commercial districts seaward of the CCL; forty-three (43) feet of structure height for MCT-commercial districts landward of the CCCL. Maximum building height shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet of structure height for MCT-residential and MCT-mixed use districts seaward of the CCL, and forty-eight (48) feet of structure height for MCT-residential and MCT-mixed use districts landward of the CCCL. Height shall be measured from zero (0) feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
vi.  All properties shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. Peripheral landscape strip and parking standards are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. Parking requirements are specified under architectural standards of this overlay code. 
vii.  All non-conforming MCT-commercial lots less than one hundred (100) feet in width and/or less than the district minimum lot area required shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. 
viii.  All non-conforming MCT-residential lots less than eighty (80) feet in width or less than the district minimum lot area required shall have front, side, and rear peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet. 
ix.  All non-conforming MCT-residential lots shall be required to conform to the non-conforming standards as set forth in this overlay code as they apply to MMF-12 development standards. 
x.  For non-conforming MCT-residential lots fifty (50) feet wide or less, the owner may request an administrative waiver of up to twenty (20) percent of the side setback (two (2) feet on each side) to redress hardships associated with meeting driveways and parking requirements for multifamily development. Waiver limits are contained in the development standards of this overlay code. 
Special Purpose District 
(3)  Manasota planned development zoning and land uses (MPD). The following numerical requirements apply subject to the provisions below. 

 
a.  All setbacks (front, side, and rear) are subject to the stepped setback provisions set forth under the development standards, section (i)(8) of this overlay code. Stepped setbacks are a function of building height. 
b.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet for lands previously MSF zones seaward of the CCCL and forty-three (43) feet for MSF zones landward of the CCCL. Maximum height shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet for lands previously MMF and MCT-residential zones seaward of the CCCL and forty-eight (48) feet for MMF and MCT-residential landward of the CCCL. MCT-mixed use developments shall not exceed the fifty-five (55) feet seaward of the CCCL and forty-eight (48) feet landward of the CCCL and shall include one (1) floor of commercial use. Maximum height shall be measured from zero feet NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. Building height calculations are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
c.  Floor-area ratio shall be calculated excluding all submerged portions of the MPD site. 
d.  Lands subject to a MPD rezoning shall meet the minimum lot frontage for the most restrictive zoning district applicable to the property prior to the rezoning to a MPD. 
e.  There shall be one (1) main point of access and one (1) emergency entrance per contiguous land rezoned to MPD. 
f.  Lands subject to a MPD rezoning shall be contiguous whenever possible. If said lands are not contiguous, a twenty-five-foot MPD setback shall be applicable whenever the proposed MPD abuts property not zoned MPD. Said MPD setback shall contain the uses and structures permissible in the peripheral landscaping strip, as defined in this section. Front and rear yard areas may contain pools or other accessory structures as set forth in this overlay code. 
g.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the entire MPD parcel shall be open space, which shall include environmentally sensitive habitats and vegetated areas and shall not be encumbered by an impervious surface. Easements and parking areas are not included in open space calculations. 
h.  When the minimum MPD setbacks above conflict with other required setbacks, including CCCL regulations, and other applicable regulations, the enforceable setback shall be that which results in a greater distance from property lines to structures. 
i.  Density bonuses. Density bonuses shall not be applicable in the overlay code. 
j.  Failure to obtain final approval for a MPD within three (3) years with no extension from concept plan approval may cause the county to initiate a rezoning of the property, which shall revert to the zoning district back to its original designation. 
k.  Parking requirements: 
i)  All land coverings, including parking and circulation areas, must be pervious. This requirement shall not apply to areas under the footprints of approved structures. 
ii)  Parking standards are contained under the development standards of this overlay code. 
iii)  Parking areas shall be located on the same parcel as the proposed use. Parking shall not be a principal use on any given parcel. 
l.  Principle uses and structures: Uses and structures permissible under the MPD district shall be equivalent to those that would otherwise be permissible on the property or properties prior to rezoning to a MPD. In no case shall multi-family dwellings replace single-family dwellings. However, multi-family zones may be rezoned to single-family. 
m.  Accessory uses and structures: Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the principal uses approved for the MPD are permissible in this district. Where a MPD contains residential uses, noncommercial docks are allowed. Such marine structures shall be permitted according to the Code. 
n.  MPD developments are subject to all other development and design standards contained in the overlay code. 
(h)  Permitted uses and use table. 
(1)  The permitted uses in the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay districts are identified in the use table. 

 
(2)  It is the intent of this section to restrict the allowable uses with the overlay code districts to avoid trip-generating traffic not related to residential and beach-related tourist uses on this small barrier strip. 
(3)  Unless specifically defined in the above table and this subsection, additional uses and structures are prohibited. 
(4)  Public parks and recreational facilities shall only be allowed in the MES district and only by special exception and only if restricted to meet the intent of the MES district. 
(5)  Paid parking shall be prohibited on any parcel within the overlay district, except on public recreation lands. Leasing or rental of upland properties on the islands for short-term parking or long-term storage of vehicles or trailers shall be prohibited in all districts. Multi-story parking garage structures shall be prohibited in all districts. 
(6)  Lodges or private clubs shall be prohibited in all districts and beach clubs shall be allowed only without food or sundry sales. 
(7)  Hotel/motel/inn uses may have commissary, coffee bar, continental breakfast and other services for their guests. 
(8)  Sport marinas and resort marinas shall be prohibited. However, leasing of dock space in the MCT district only on lots adjacent to coastal waters not on the Gulf of Mexico is permitted as a special exception with the following restrictions: no live-aboard dockage; no sale of fuel and lubricants; no provisions, bait and tackle; no service buildings with laundry facilities, showers, toilets; no rental of motorized watercraft; and no launching of boats from the site. A condition of the permit is adequate parking for leased dock spaces. Private noncommercial boat docks are permissible in MES, MSF, MMF, and MCT-residential districts for the exclusive use of the property owner or someone with a legal interest greater than a lease hold interest and are prohibited from being rented. 
(9)  The rental, sale, or repair of motorized vehicles, including but not limited to boats, jet skis, scooters, and segways, is prohibited. Non-motorized recreational rentals, including but not limited to kayaks, canoes, and bicycles, is allowed in the MCG district and, as a special exception in MCT district. 
(10)  Home occupations are allowed by special exception in MSF and MMF zones. In addition to meeting the requirements of the Code, the applicant must provide documentation that the proposed home occupation does not involve employees or clients who visit the premises and will not generate parking space demands (e.g., telemarketing verses music teacher); or if lot is twice the minimum lot size, demonstrate that there is adequate parking for the number of clients expected to be serviced. 
(11)  One (1) guest house or one (1) servant's quarters for each single-family dwelling are allowed by special exception, provided the lot area shall be not less than twice the minimum lot area required for a single-family dwelling; and the guest house or servant's quarters is intended for use on a temporary basis. The guest house and principal dwelling shall not be rented separately. 
(12)  Restaurant outdoor seating is an allowable use for restaurants and bars, and, whether covered or uncovered, shall be required to be reviewed for compliance with the setback, paving and other requirements of this overlay code. Outdoor and under-structure exterior bar areas are allowed, but shall be required to meet the setback, paving, height, and other requirements of this overlay code. 
(13)  Specialty shops include small jewelry, gift, clothing, accessories, coffee, bakery, ice cream, and the like, beach tourist-related shops. Such other beach tourist-related shops, as determined by the zoning official, may be permitted by special exception. 
(14)  Accessory structures and accessory uses. Accessory structures shall be required to meet the standards set forth under (i) and (k) of this overlay code. 
a.  Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the MSF principal uses and structures are also permitted within the MSF districts and include: private garages and storage structures, greenhouses; swimming pools and hot tubs; and tennis courts, subject to standards under (i) and (k) of this overlay code. 
b.  Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the MMF principal uses and structures are also permitted within the MMF districts and include private garages and storage structures, swimming pools and hot tubs, and tennis courts, subject to standards under (i) and (k) of this overlay code. 
c.  Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the MCT principal uses and structures are also permitted within this district including a residential dwelling unit within the same structure as the principal use for occupancy by owner or employee of permitted uses, parking lots, and outdoor dining areas. 
d.  Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the MCG principal uses and structures are also permitted in this district, including a residential dwelling unit within the same structure as the principal use for occupancy by owner or employee of permitted uses, parking lots, and outdoor dining areas. 
e.  Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to the MES principal uses and structures are permissible in this district including private noncommercial boat dock but not piers, docks and wharves. 
f.  Accessory structures are required to be setback within the yards including, but not limited to, detached garages and carports, storage structures, swimming pools and hot tubs, with or without screen enclosures; green houses, and tennis courts. 
g.  Only the following accessory uses are permitted within the required yards on Manasota and Sandpiper Key: 1) stairways may project up to four (4) feet in a required front or rear yard, but not into the required side yards. Guttered roof overhangs may project up to two (2) feet into a required front or rear yard on all lots; and may project up to two (2) feet into the side yard and peripheral landscape strip on lots fifty (50) feet wide or less. Where elevated, these uses must meet the stepped setback and maximum height requirements of this overlay code. 
(15)  Uses and structures permissible under the MPD district shall be equivalent to those that would otherwise be permissible on the property or properties prior to rezoning to a MPD. 
(i)  Development standards. These development standards shall apply to all zoning districts within the overlay code. 
(1)  Uniform line of construction. In order to maintain the uniform line of construction of major structures within the overlay district, no portion of a residential structure shall be located seaward of this line, or of a line traced between the corners of the two (2) nearest buildings along the Gulf of Mexico, except as permitted by DEP. 
(2)  No-fill area. The entire overlay district is designated as a no-fill area, within which only pilings and stemwalls may be used for all construction, except the minimum amount of fill necessary within the building footprint and for drainfields associated with on-site waste treatment and disposal systems. 
(3)  Pervious material. With the exception of fences and walls, all ground-level amenities such as walkways, patios, new private roads, residential driveways, and all parking spaces outside of the building footprint shall be constructed of pervious materials to improve drainage and runoff. Pavers for parking lots, driveways, patios and pools shall be installed to meet or exceed product filtration rate of three (3) inches per hour; and minimal subgrade slope not to exceed one (1) percent for parking, vehicular traffic areas and patios. The only exceptions to the use of pervious pavers shall be a three-foot perimeter around a pool and handicapped accessible routes when required by ADA. 

Diagram 1: Permeable Paving System 

Diagram 2: Permeable Pavers with Storage Base 

Diagram 3: Pervious Pavers without Storage Base 
  
  
(4)  Bulk limitations. No building shall be over two hundred (200) feet wide or long in any zoning district. 
(5)  Open space/reservation area. All development within the overlay district subject to site plan review shall include an open space/habitat reservation area equal to five (5) percent of the total area of the development. No financial contribution in lieu of reservation shall be permitted. Peripheral landscape strips and setbacks may be counted as part of the open space habitat area unless the lot is greater than one-quarter (¼) acre. 
(6)  Pilings for structures. 
a.  Pilings shall conform to construction techniques authorized under the Florida Building Code. 
b.  Pilings for structures throughout Manasota and Sandpiper Key shall be augered into the ground, or otherwise introduced through contemporary technologies that are shown to reduce the noise and vibration in sufficient amount to meet the intent of this section. 
c.  If driving pilings into or onto the ground is proposed, 
1.  The developer must conduct a detailed geotechnical analysis of the property with a certification from a geotechnical engineer that the proposed development activity will have no adverse impacts to adjacent properties; and 
2.  Show proof of minimum insurance policy coverage of one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) per occurrence and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) aggregate. 
3.  If pile driving is deemed appropriate, the contractor shall be required to notify by mail the owner of properties within three hundred (300) feet of the outer limits if the subject property and document existing conditions of structures, prior to the planned development. 
4.  The contractor must offer all properties within three hundred (300) feet an opportunity to have their properties inspected by an engineer/inspector prior to pile driving at the builder's expense. The intent of this inspection is to create a record of conditions prior to work occurring. 
5.  The contractor must also offer all properties within three hundred (300) feet an opportunity to have, at builder's expense, one (1) on-site seismic reading during the pile driving. A permit to drive piles (pile driving) will not be issued until the contractor of record provides to the county by affidavit a list of property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the project and addresses along with a receipt or other proof of mailing and completion of required inspections. 
6.  The contractor of record or the owner-builder shall be the party responsible to insure that the notification and offers have been made and that reasonable effort to comply with these requirements has occurred. Records of these offers shall be maintained by the contractor or owner-builder and be made available to the building and zoning division. 
7.  In addition, the contractor shall be required to provide the county with an insurance certificate showing that the contractor carries comprehensive general liability in the amount of one million five hundred thousand dollars ($1,500,000.00) for each occurrence, and aggregate and property damage in the amount of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for each occurrence and the five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) aggregate. For the purposes of this section, "pile driven" constitutes a work effort for driving, impact driving or hammer driving of a pile or similar object into the ground used to support or reinforce any structure or building including but not limited to treated timber piling, prestressed concrete piling, steel piling, driven test piling, concrete sheet piling, steel sheet piling, batter piles, anchor piles, dolphin piles, fender piles and guide piles. 
8.  The contractor of record must complete an application for pile driving on the form prescribed by the county. The application shall contain notice provisions, geotechnical data, and insurance requirements as enumerated above. 
9.  Notwithstanding the contents of this subsection, this restriction shall not be applicable to pilings which are installed onto submerged lands as part of dockage or other marine structures. 
(7)  Maximum building height, maximum stories and maximum building height calculation. For the purpose of the overlay code, the maximum height of a building shall be measured from zero (0) NGVD to the top of the highest constructed element. 
a.  Highest constructed element is the highest point of a building or the highest point of any rooftop livable space or appurtenances thereto. 
b.  Rooftop livable space is all usable areas upon or above the roof of a building including but not limited to decks, swimming pools, walls, fences and railings. Rooftop livable space shall be calculated as the actual height of the railing, fence, wall or other rooftop structure. 
c.  Appurtenance includes but is not limited to ornamental fixtures and fittings and rooftop equipment such as chimneys, antennas, cupolas, elevators, or other mechanical or communications equipment. 
d.  Only the following essential appurtenances shall be allowed above the rooftop or highest constructed element on Manasota Key, to exceed the height cap for the property, in the MMF and MCT-residential zones associated with multi-family development: Stairs at no greater than seven (7) feet; elevator shafts at no greater than four (4) feet; AC units at no greater than four and one-half (4½) feet; and mechanical pipes no greater than two (2) feet; and lightning rods no greater than two (2) feet. These appurtenances shall not be allowed on any facade. All appurtenances shall be located near the center of the roof, behind a line of sight. The "line of sight" shall be fifteen (15) degrees from the street front facade and thirty (30) degrees from all other facades. For all essential appurtenances that exceed the building height cap, there shall be a horizontal green space offset equal to the square footage of the height of the appurtenance that protrudes above the highest constructed element times the widest or longest dimension of the appurtenance. For example, if a stairway protrudes seven (7) feet above the highest constructed element and is ten (10) feet at its greatest width or length dimension, the green space offset required shall be seventy (70) square feet. The green space offset can be located anywhere on the property outside the peripheral landscape strip. 
e.  Maximum building height shall not exceed forty-eight (48) feet of structure height for MSF, MCG and MCT-Commercial Districts seaward of the CCCL; forty-three (43) feet of structure height for MSF, MCG and MCT-commercial districts landward of the CCCL; fifty-five (55) feet of structure height for MMF, MCT-residential and MCT-mixed use districts seaward of the CCCL, and forty-eight (48) feet of structure height for MMF, MCT-Residential and MCT-mixed use districts landward of the CCCL. 
f.  The maximum number of stories shall be no greater than three (3) stories over parking in MMF, MCT-residential and MCT-mixed use zones; and no greater than two (2) stories over parking in MSF, MCG, and MCT-commercial zones. 
g.  In unique circumstances, due to ground level or elevation requirements, the forty-eight (48) foot NGVD height limit may be exceeded such that a thirty-five-foot building envelope may be met from finished floor to the top of the roof on multi-family development projects landward of the CCCL. 
h.  In unique circumstances, where any portion of a building is located in two (2) flood zones, one (1) being seaward of the CCCL, the seaward maximum height shall apply to the entire building. 
i.  There shall be a required green space off-set of one (1) linear foot for each foot of structure height in excess of fifty-two (52) feet in the MMF, MCT-residential and MCT-mixed use zones seaward of the CCCL to be added in the front yard, in addition to the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip. For every foot of additional building height over fifty-two (52) feet, there shall be a horizontal foot of green space added to the entire width of the front yard immediately adjacent to the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip. For example, if a structure is built to the maximum height of fifty-five (55) feet, seaward of the CCCL, three (3) feet of green space shall be added to the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip, resulting in a thirteen-foot green space setback along the entire width of the front yard. 
j.  Height limits for accessory structures are specified under (k) of this [overlay] code. 
(8)  Building setback calculation. The overlay district shall be exempt from the requirements of the waterfront property code. In the overlay district, stepped setbacks shall be required to preserve open vistas on Manasota and Sandpiper Keys by limiting the height and size of structures in the overlay district. The stepped setback was designed to eliminate the need for variances tied to roof overhangs, balcony rails, and other side building features, as well as to allow flexibility for architectural designs. For single family construction, gambrel and peaked roofs are encouraged. 
a.  The following specific stepped setback requirements and calculations shall be applied: 
1.  Structures shall be set back from the property lines not less than the minimum required yards in this overlay code. No structure shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the shoreline of the Gulf of Mexico. Structures shall be set back from other water bodies not less than the minimum required by this overlay code. 
2.  Stepped setbacks, regardless of actual building elevation required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP), shall be calculated as follows: In FEMA-governed zones starting at two (2) feet above the minimum lowest floor elevation or base floor elevation (BFE) to the top of the highest constructive element. In FDEP V-Zones, starting at thirty (30) inches above the least horizontal shore parallel structural member (LHSM) to the top of the highest constructed element. 
3.  Setback distance shall be calculated by measuring the horizontal distance from the lot line to the minimum setback at a specified height from two (2) feet above the minimum finished floor elevation (MFFE), as specified in the table below: 

 
4.  No encroachments shall be allowed within the building setbacks as calculated herein, except "guttered roof overhangs" and sunshades may extend two (2) feet into the setbacks at each stepped setback. For multifamily development on lots fifty-foot wide or less, the stepped setback may be reduced to from sixteen (16) feet to fifteen (15) feet on one (1) side only, exclusively to accommodate an elevator shaft or stairwell. 
5.  No building may be constructed seaward of the CCCL unless a permit has been issued by the state. 
6.  All principle structures on the same development site, except single-story accessory structures, shall have a minimum structure-to-structure setback equal to the height of the taller structure: For this purpose, height of the structure being measured from finished floor elevation to the peak of the roof. No structure shall exceed the maximum building height limit in their zoning district. 
7.  Stepped setback requirements apply to all setbacks (front, side and rear). 

(9)  Peripheral landscape strip. Peripheral landscape strips are required on all lots within the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay district. All properties, conforming and nonconforming, shall have front, side interior and rear interior peripheral landscape strips of no less than ten (10) feet from the property line. Peripheral landscape strips shall be located immediately adjacent and parallel to all sides of a lot boundary. All peripheral landscape strips shall be either synthetic pervious turf or green open areas. A ten-foot wide synthetic pervious turf, or green open area with a vegetated landscape strip along the entire ten-foot perimeter is required and intended to screen and separate new development or improvements to existing development from adjacent existing development and from the public right-of-way. Vegetated landscaping means grass, ground cover, mulch, shrubs, vines, hedges, synthetic pervious turf, or trees. Pavement, sand, shell, rock, and aggregate shall not be considered approved landscape material for the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip, except that clean shell and native beach shell may be used in lieu of mulch around shrubs. No encroachments shall be allowed within the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip including, but not limited to, structures, accessory structures, AC units, driveways, parking areas, pools and pool accessories, electrical equipment, signage, stormwater management systems, and holding tanks. Neither a structure nor any portion thereof shall be erected or shall encroach or overhang upon the required peripheral landscape strip. The only exceptions shall be: 
a.  Dune walkovers, sidewalks and driveway crossovers, where permissible. 
b.  Fences. 
c.  Guttered roof overhangs that may extend two (2) feet into the peripheral landscape strip, only on lots fifty (50) feet wide or less. 
d.  Sunshades that may extend two (2) feet into the peripheral landscape strip only on lots fifty (50) feet wide or less. 
e.  For non-conforming multifamily lots fifty (50) feet wide or less, the owner may request an administrative waiver of up to twenty (20) percent of the side setback (two (2) feet on each side) to redress hardships associated with meeting driveways and parking requirements for multifamily development. Waiver limits are as follows: No portion of the waiver areas shall be used for habitable space, for an increase in building envelope of livable area from the first floor to the highest constructed element or be permanently enclosed or roofed, and; the waiver request must document need for additional space exclusively for parking and driveway use that does not increase the livable space envelope and offers the least invasive design option regarding encroachment into the side peripheral landscape strips. 
(10)  Yard setbacks. Yard setbacks, greater than ten-foot peripheral landscape strip, shall be required for structures based on zoning district minimum yard requirements, abutting properties, abutting water, and building height requirement of the overlay code. No primary structures shall be allowed to encroach within the greater yard building setback area, however appurtenances and mechanical equipment for the primary structure, which are typically allowed within required yards may be located within the greater yard setback. Accessory structures, parking, and driveways may be located within the greater yard building setback area as long as county codes and the overlay code district standards and architectural standards are met. 
(11)  Accessory structures. No accessory structures or uses, other than fences shall be allowed within the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip. All accessory structures must conform to the side and rear setback requirements of the appropriate zoning district as well as the stepped setback requirements of this overlay code; exceptions are specified under section (h)(14)g. above. Detached permanent garages must conform to the front setback requirements of the appropriate zoning district. All other accessory structures must be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the principal structure. The only exception is on lots three hundred (300) feet or greater in depth which may have screened accessory structures located in front of the building facade provided they are located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the county right-of-way. Other accessory structure requirements are contained under the architectural design standards below. Multifamily developments when permitted in any zoning district are permitted to contain a clubhouse, recreation room or similar community room to serve the residents of the development. 
(12)  Nonconforming lots. It is the intent of this section to specify provisions of the overlay code that supersede the county nonconforming provisions and exceptions to yards provisions and which sections of the Code remain in place. It is also the intent to include provisions unique to nonconforming lots in the overlay boundary. Other than the administrative waiver provided for in this overlay code, it is the intent that all lots contain a ten-foot peripheral landscape strip. 
a.  Within the Manasota and Sandpiper Key overlay district, the provisions of the county code requiring a variance to build on a lot less than five thousand (5,000) square feet or less than fifty (50) feet in width shall not apply as long as the building conforms to the requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
b.  The minimum side yard interior setbacks in all districts for conforming and nonconforming lots, including lots less than five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be ten (10) feet. The only exception is provided for under the administrative waiver procedure for MMF and MCT-residential lots in this overlay code. In these cases, documentation shall be provided to indicate why the administrative waiver is warranted, and an administrative variance shall not be granted in addition to the administrative waiver. 
c.  The variance provisions of the Code under section 3-9-6.3 provide for relief in hardship cases for nonconforming lots in the overlay code. The administrative variance under 3-9-6.3(g) shall not be permitted for side yard variances which result in a side yard of less than ten (10) feet, and the provisions contained in section 3-9-10.(c)(3)a. and section 3-9-5.3(2) shall not apply when they would result in a side yard of less than ten (10) feet. 
(13)  Parking standards. For any residential development within the overlay district, each residential dwelling unit shall provide a minimum of two (2) spaces per unit. Multifamily developments shall provide additional parking spaces for services and guests. Service parking requirements shall be the lowest whole number that is greater than or equal to ten (10) percent of the number of units contained within the multifamily project. Guest parking requirements shall be the lowest whole number that is greater than or equal to twenty (20) percent of the number of units contained within the multifamily project. At least one (1) of the guest parking spaces as required by this section shall be handicapped accessible. Beach access points on the islands shall not be obstructed by parked cars or any other barriers. Parking of unlicensed or unregistered automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats and/or trailers shall be prohibited. Parking standards for commercial structures shall meet the Code requirements. 
(14)  Disaster recovery. Following a natural disaster, as determined by the board, multifamily developments that are nonconforming due to their density may be rebuilt with no increase in square footage, so long as they comply with as many other development standards of this overlay code as possible, while still allowing the overall pre-disaster density which existed to be retained. In redevelopment of the site, first priority shall be given to establishing the peripheral landscape strip, to the greatest extent possible. Documentation shall be provided to indicate where a particular development standard cannot be met. 
(15)  Underground utilities. Electrical wires that connect poles with structures shall be placed underground. 
(16)  Spot ground elevations. The spot ground elevations for new development and for reconstruction that exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement value of an existing structure shall be established prior to any clearing of the site by a signed and sealed survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in Florida. There shall be a minimum of one (1) spot elevation per site, with additional spot ground elevations provided at every one (1) foot of elevation change within the site. 
(17)  Density on barrier islands. There shall be no transfer of density units into Manasota and Sandpiper Key from other areas of the county. Transferring density between Manasota Key and Sandpiper Key is prohibited. In addition to the requirements set forth in the county's transfer of density units code, the transfer of density units within Manasota Key or Sandpiper Key shall not be used contrary to the intent of the Manasota community plan and shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  Density units from category I hurricane storm surge zone cannot be transferred into a tropical storm surge zone; and 
b.  Density units from an AE flood zone cannot be transferred into a VE flood zone; and 
c.  No transfers of density from a less to a more restrictive flood zone; and 
d.  All development standards set forth in this section shall apply. 
(j)  Architectural design standards. 
Applicability. These architectural design standards shall apply to all new development within the overlay district, including but not be limited to new development, new structures and to any alterations or additions to existing structures. These standards shall regulate the appearance and constructive elements of structures and be used in addition to those expressed elsewhere in this overlay code. 
(1)  Driveways and parking areas and walkways/sidewalks. 
a.  No driveway shall exceed twenty-four (24) feet in width where it connects with the roadway. 
b.  In MES and MSF districts, only one (1) driveway crossing is permitted within the front yard setback. In MMF districts, one (1) driveway crossing allowed every three hundred (300) feet within the front yard setback. 
c.  New private roads and parking and driveways, and those where fifty (50) percent of their original area is repaired or replaced shall be paved with crushed shell, stone, brick, or other pervious materials, to improve drainage and runoff in a manner that will permit maximum water absorption. Pervious surfacing must be on a bed of sand designed and installed in a manner that will permit water absorption through the joints and the sand bed. New asphalt and concrete (porous or nonporous) shall be prohibited. Concrete walkways are permitted only when ADA compliance is required. When pavers are installed, the contractor must provide a letter certifying that the pavers are pervious and that the pavers will be installed to maximize on-site water absorption. Developments built before 2008 that have asphalt driveways, are exempt from the pervious surface requirements of the section when repairing or replacing their asphalt driveways, though encouraged to address runoff issues associated with driveways. 
d.  Walkways are permitted within the peripheral landscape strip only when they are necessary to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Asphalt paving is prohibited. This requirement shall not apply to areas under the footprints of approved structures. 
e.  Stepping stones are permitted. 
f.  Driveways shall not encroach upon the side peripheral landscape strip. Corner lots may have one (1) driveway crossing off either street but not both. 
g.  Entry walkways shall be clearly defined and shall not encroach upon the ten-foot side peripheral landscape strip. 
h.  A single dune walkover per lot, where applicable, is permitted. 
(2)  Building and facade materials and design. 
a.  All facades, excluding doors, windows, and trim, shall be improved and constructed with one (1) or a combination of the following materials: i. Masonry, although unfinished and exposed concrete block is prohibited; ii. Wood; iii. Stucco; iv. Vinyl. All additions shall be required to resemble material uses on the existing structure on the same property. 
b.  No reflective materials are permitted on building facades. 
c.  All wall openings on traditional buildings, including but not limited to windows, doors, balconies, and alcoves are required to have trim installed according to the following standards: a. Trim shall resemble wood, masonry stone, stucco, or tile; b. Reflective finishes are prohibited. 
d.  All buildings shall have a clearly-defined entrance with numbers facing the street. 
e.  Garage doors shall be flush or recessed with the front facade or recessed so as not to dominate the architectural design and appearance. Garage door height is limited to ten (10) feet. 
f.  Roofs shall be constructed, maintained, and repaired according to the following standards: 
1.  Roofs shall be made of non-reflective materials. Skylights or other glass roof surfaces shall be limited to five (5) percent of the roof and not located on the front of the building. 
2.  Roof materials shall resemble non-reflective metal, wooden shingles, "dimensional" asphalt shingles, barrel tile, concrete tile, or slate, and roof additions shall be required to resemble or material uses on the existing structure on the same property. 
3.  Flat roofs shall be exempt from all preceding roof material standards provided a parapet or mansard wall is used to screen the roof and rooftop equipment. Parapets and mansard walls must conform to the height limits. 
(3)  Architectural accents. 
a.  Chimneys must be vertical, and must conform to the height limits. 
b.  Awnings shall be permanently affixed and shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above any sidewalk and eighteen (18) feet above any driveway on commercial properties. 
c.  Gutters shall resemble or match the building trim or primary facade color. Gutters shall not cause water to accumulate on neighboring properties or directly upon driveways, sidewalks, or walkways. 
d.  The space between the first floor of a building and the ground shall be screened with lattice or breakaway walls. Lattice or breakaway walls shall be used specifically to conceal appurtenances placed below the first floor and the ground, and shall be the same pattern and appearance as the outside of the structure, and shall be permanently affixed to the principal structure and be constructed of vinyl or painted wood. 
e.  All structures shall post address numbers on the front façade in a location either by the entrance or garage door, or signage easily visible and legible from the adjacent roadway. 
f.  Sunshades shall be permanently affixed and shall be retractable for use as hurricane shutters providing they meet county and state code. 
(4)  Lighting fixtures, structures, and elements. 
a.  All outside lighting fixtures shall be installed consistent with the sea turtle lighting standards. 
b.  Fixtures for lighting areas shall follow a consistent theme. 
c.  Light posts shall be installed consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Light posts shall be constructed and installed to resemble wood, polished concrete, or painted metal. 
2.  Unfinished or unpainted metal and concrete surfaces and untreated wooden posts are prohibited. 
3.  Light posts on private property shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
d.  Outside lighting fixtures shall be installed to orient light downward and to provide glare reduction optics and shielding features. No fixture shall direct light upward or onto adjacent property. (Exemptions shall include small accent lights that are directed upward to softly illuminate landscaping.) 
e.  Light globes shall not protrude below shades. 
(5)  Fencing and walls. 
a.  Chain link fencing is prohibited. Coated chain link fencing may be used to enclose tennis courts and swimming pools. In such cases, the fence shall be replaced at the first signs of wear or rust. A coated chain link fence may also include tennis fence netting. Temporary security fences for construction sites installed for six (6) months or less shall not be required to be coated chain link fencing. 
b.  Concrete block walls must be split-faced or finished, and capped. Unfinished concrete block is prohibited. 
c.  Wood fences must be constructed of pressure-treated lumber to prevent deterioration and rot. 
d.  Solid walls and fences on or near the periphery of a lot must contain openings that may be used by wildlife. These openings must be at least nine (9) inches wide and six (6) inches high and must be located every twenty-five (25) feet along the bottom of the fence or wall. 
e.  Fences and walls that abut a body of water shall not exceed four (4) feet in height for portions that extend beyond the building facade that faces the body of water. 
f.  Fences and walls shall not exceed six (6) feet of height, measured from the finished grade of the parcel. 
g.  Fences and wall[s] forward of the front building facade shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(6)  Accessory structures. In addition to the accessory requirements contained under the development standards above, accessory structures must meet the following architectural design standards: 
a.  The total area of accessory structures shall not exceed one-half (½) the footprint of the principal structure or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is greater, and shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by zoning district when combined with area of the principal structure. Owners of lots greater than one (1) acre in area may apply for a special exception to exceed the maximum lot coverage standard. 
b.  Metal buildings or temporary structures such as awnings or carports are not permitted. Accessory structures must be built with materials designed to withstand salt and high winds. 
c.  Garage or storage structures over two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area must be compatible in appearance and materials with the principal structure. 
d.  Sheds, gazebos, cabanas, and decks must be located behind the front building facade, and may not be located within the peripheral landscape strips. The only exception is on lots three hundred (300) feet or greater in depth which may have screened accessory structures located in front of the building façade provided they are located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the county right-of-way. 
e.  Roofing materials must resemble or be complimentary to the materials used on the principal structure. 
f.  Gazebos, detached garages, and detached screened pool enclosures may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height from finished grade. All other accessory structures may not exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
g.  Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, and other water features and their decks shall be installed and constructed consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Swimming pools are limited to one (1) vertical accessory including but not limited to slides and diving boards. Vertical accessories shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Swimming pools and pool equipment shall not be located within the peripheral landscape strips. 
2.  Above-ground exterior swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas are prohibited. Exterior swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas must be permanently installed in the ground or within a masonry foundation. 
3.  Portable spas must be modified to conform to these standards. 
h.  Air conditioning and heating units must be installed consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Units must be screened from off-site view. 
2.  Consideration must be given to avoid impacts to adjacent properties. 
3.  Mechanical equipment shall be expressly prohibited from being considered for a variance or special exception. 
i.  Pool equipment and propane tanks of two hundred fifty (250) cubic feet or greater shall be screened from off-site view. 
j.  Miscellaneous accessory structures must be constructed consistent with the following standards: 
k.  Ramps, where required, must be concealed with landscaping to the greatest extent possible, and must blend with the scale and architectural features of the structure. 
l.  No accessory structures shall be permitted within the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip. 
m.  Above roof appurtenances on commercial buildings shall be screened from view. 
n.  New dumpsters shall be stored and screened within an enclosed area, not in front of the leading edge of the building facade. Waste receptacles, garbage and trash containers shall be screened from off-site view and meet all other County Code requirements. All existing dumpsters that cannot be moved to meet the new requirements shall be required to be screened with an enclosure that exceeds the height of the dumpster. 
(7)  Commercial and multifamily buildings. In addition to the above architectural design standards, all commercial and multifamily buildings must also conform to the following standards: 
a.  Primary building entrances must be oriented towards adjacent roadways. 
b.  Loading docks and delivery vehicle parking areas should be located to the rear and side of the building. To the greatest extent possible, these elements should not be placed between the front building facade and the roadway. 
c.  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(k)  Landscaping. Landscaping on Manasota and Sandpiper Keys shall be subject to the provisions and standards of the overlay code. In addition to such standards, all landscaping on the Manasota and Sandpiper Key shall be installed, repaired and maintained consistent with the guidelines in this section. 
(1)  A landscaping plan is required for all new development and modifications to existing structures that exceed fifty (50) percent of the total structure's assessed value. 
(2)  The landscape plan must be drawn to scale with dimensions, distances and scale, and shall identify the type and location of existing and proposed vegetation and other landscape features including the proposed green vegetation in the peripheral landscape strip, the landscape plan for the yards, as well as all easements, building structures, accessory structures, stormwater retention, and similar features. 
(3)  The proposed plantings in the peripheral landscape strip shall meet the objectives to screen and separate new development or improvements to existing development from adjacent existing development and from the public right-of-way. Vegetated landscaping means grass, ground cover, mulch, shrubs, vines, hedges, synthetic pervious turf, or trees. Pavement, sand, shell rock, and aggregate shall not be considered approved landscape material for the ten-foot peripheral landscape strip, except that clean shell and native beach shell may be used in lieu of mulch around shrubs. 
(4)  Developers shall meet the one (1) tree point per two thousand (2,000) square feet of development site. A "buy-out" option from this requirement shall be prohibited. On nonconforming lots less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, a minimum of two (2) tree points shall be required. 
(5)  Foundation plantings shall be installed around buildings to soften their appearance from offsite view. 
(6)  Peripheral landscape strips and yard areas shall be treated with Florida friendly landscape material. 
(7)  Commercial buildings and multi-family residence requirements, in addition to the requirements above: 
a.  A landscaping plan, signed and sealed by a landscape design professional, shall be submitted with all new construction and/or modifications to existing structures that exceed fifty (50) percent of the total structure's assessed value. 
b.  Parking lot areas shall be screened with low fencing and/or landscaping whenever such areas abut public rights-of-way, existing residential uses, or property zoned for residential use. One (1) tree is required for every thirty-five (35) feet of perimeter landscape strip abutting a public right-of-way. 
(l)  Signs standards. 
(1)  Applicability. These regulations are intended to complement the county sign code and address the limited amount of area available to promote the business on the key. Any sign on Manasota and Sandpiper Key that is erected, constructed, installed, altered or moved shall conform to the provisions of the overlay code. Any inconsistencies between the overlay code and any other building, electric codes adopted by the county, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(2)  General provisions for signs on Manasota and Sandpiper Key. 
a.  Private and temporary signs shall not be placed in the roundabout nor shall they be placed on any public right-of-way, including along Beach Road, Gulf Boulevard, or North Beach Road, and shall not exceed four (4) square feet. 
b.  Single-faced signs shall be painted black on the back side. 
c.  All new free-standing signs shall be monument signs. Maximum height of monument signs shall be four (4) feet above the crown of the road. Eight-inch street names and number may be placed on top of these monument signs. 
d.  Traffic or other directional sign, symbols or devices relating to traffic, parking, public services, facilities or warnings shall be painted black on the rear when visible to the general public and be mounted on decorative poles. Whenever a traffic or way finding directional sign is erected on public right-of-way for the benefit of or upon request by a private development or individual, the sign shall be paid by the project requesting or benefiting from the sign and be on decorative poles paid by them. 
e.  No sign including an exempt sign shall be constructed, erected or interferes with any utility, communication, cable or stormwater infrastructure. 
f.  All temporary signs and flags shall be removed in the event of a tropical storm, hurricane and flood warnings. 
g.  Flags shall not be placed in the public right-of-way. 
h.  Nonadvertising directional signs, symbols or devices related to traffic, parking or warnings on private property: entrances, exits, slow, no trespassing or no parking shall not exceed three (3) square feet. 
i.  Political signs shall be limited to four (4) square feet and be removed in ten (10) days after the election and may be erected no more than forty-five (45) days prior to election. 
j.  Murals and wall art shall not be calculated as sign area if they do not contain text or logos. 
k.  Two-sided signs with the same face on each side shall be calculated on only one side. With respect to a double-faced (back-to-back) sign, there can be no separation between the backs of each face of the sign other than the structural support to which each sign is attached. 
l.  Normal maintenance to existing conforming signs shall not be deemed alterations within this overlay code. 
m.  Dedicatory tablets or memorial plaques setting forth the name or erection date of a building, commemorating a person or persons and like uses shall be cast in metal or engraved in stone or concrete or otherwise inscribed in or on a monumental material, not to exceed four (4) square feet. 
n.  No signs shall be exempt from obtaining a permit on Manasota and Sandpiper Key. 
o.  Sign area shall be calculated as the area within the smallest regular geometric shape or combination of shapes which encompasses all the display elements (letters, numbers, figures, characters, corporate logos, etc.) of the sign, including blank areas between display elements. The area of the sign shall include all changing copy features such as letter boards or light boards. Only the eight-inch street names and numbers placed on top of non-residential signs shall not be calculated as part of the total allowed square footage. 
(3)  Residential signage. 
a.  Single-family units and multifamily complex—one freestanding temporary yard sign that does not exceed twelve (12) by eighteen (18) inches. For example, for garage or property sale, lease or rent. An additional sign of twelve (12) by eighteen (18) inches which is located in their yard on a navigable body of water shall be allowed facing the water. 
b.  One (1) sign denoting the architect, engineer or contractor for work under construction, not exceeding four (4) square feet. 
c.  Multifamily units shall be treated as a single unit with the exception of: 
1.  Multifamily developments may have one (1) community sign per three hundred-foot of road right-of-way and street name. Eight-inch street names and numbers may be placed on top of these signs. 
2.  Community signs shall be monument signs, limited to four-foot in height and sixteen (16) square feet in area. Community signs shall include eight-inch street numbers. 
3.  Community signs may be two-sided providing each side is exactly the same and will count as only one (1) side for sign allocation, and shall not contain any form of advertising. 
4.  Community signs shall not be located in the side peripheral landscape strip area. 
5.  Residential signs may not be internally lit. Community signs may have low level ground-up lighting providing the light does not illuminate above or beyond the sign. All lit signs must comply with the county sea turtle lighting code and must provide two (2) copies of the lighting plan to the county. 
6.  Multifamily communities may have one (1) building wall or fence sign instead of a monument sign. Wall and fence signs shall be limited to sixteen (16) square feet and shall include the eight-inch street numbers. Wall signs shall not be located above the peak of the roof or highest constructive element. Wall signs shall not project horizontally beyond the building wall. 
7.  Vacant property may have one (1) sign of sixteen (16) square feet. 
(4)  Nonresidential signage. 
a.  Each unit is allowed a sign allocation of sixty (60) square feet. Freestanding signs must be monument signs. Sign allocation may be flexible where monument signs are inappropriate due to parking viability requirements. 
b.  Each unit is allowed one (1) monument primary sign not to exceed twenty-five (25) square feet. Non-residential primary signs shall include street name and numbers of eight (8) inches in height and may contain movable lettering. Eight-inch street names and numbers may be placed on top of these signs. These street names and number shall not be calculated as part of the total allowed square footage. 
c.  Monument primary signs may be two-sided providing each side is exactly the same and will count as only one (1) side for sign allocation. No portion of any monument sign shall be allowed to encroach onto a private walkway or driveway or within the public right-of-way. 
d.  Each unit may have one (1) building sign that does not rise above the peak of the roof or highest constructive element and does not project horizontally beyond the end of the building wall. Building signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet per sign. The sign allocation for each property combined between wall and freestanding sign shall be sixty (60) square feet. No portion of any wall sign shall be allowed to encroach onto a private walkway or driveway. 
e.  Monument signs shall not be located in the peripheral landscape strip. 
f.  Wall signs shall not be located on the side or rear of a building which abuts to a residentially-zoned property. 
g.  Changeable copy signs are limited to a maximum of eight (8) square feet per sign face with a maximum letter height of eight (8) inches and shall be included in the sign allocation. Sign face may be illuminated with low level internal lighting that does not create a problem for our turtle friendly neighborhood. 
h.  Only in MCG and MCT commercial zoning districts may existing pole or pylon signs installed before February, 2005, be replaced, and only when parking will obscure sign face of a monument signs. 
i.  Banners, pendants, feather flags and sail flags in MCG and MCT commercial zoning districts, so long as they are sited on private property and do not fly over the public right-of-way, sidewalks or streets, and no more than one (1) of these per fifty (50) feet of frontage. No more than one (1) of these allowed per fifty (50) feet of frontage with a maximum of two (2) per business property, and each banner, pendant, feather, flag and sail signs shall be no greater than twenty-four (24) square feet, provided they may be flown no more than two (2) times per calendar year and for no more than thirty (30) days per permit. National and state flags are excluded from this requirement. 
j.  Vacant property may have one (1) sign of sixteen (16) square feet. 
(5)  Prohibited signs. 
a.  Neon, chasing, animated or flashing signs. 
b.  Signs that emit an audible sound or visible matter such as smoke or steam. 
c.  Billboards. 
d.  Portable illuminated signs, whirling signs, animated signs, or wind signs. 
e.  Temporary signs placed on sidewalks or bike paths. 
f.  Signs above the roof or mansard of the building. 
g.  New pole or pylon signs, except as provided in (4)h. above. 
h.  Any sign prohibited by state or federal law. 
i.  Any sign creating a traffic hazard by obstructing vision in any sight triangle. 
j.  Any sign from preventing free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape or other entrance or exit to any building, or any sign attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
k.  Any sign that is obscene, such as a sign depicting nudity or sexual conduct. 
l.  Any sign that constitutes a public nuisance, such as signs that produce hazardous amounts of glare, advertise an illegal activity, convey false information, or lead the public into errors of conduct, thought or judgment, especially by intentionally deceiving. 
m.  Any sign that emits a sound, smell or smoke. 
n.  Any sign that has been abandoned, including primary signs, unless the signs panel within the abandoned sign structure has been removed and replaced with a sign panel or neutral color containing no message. 
o.  Any sign designed with mechanized or electric changeable copy to display more than one (1) image on an ongoing basis where any information flashes, fades, dissolves, or scrolls or signs that move or create the illusion of movement, or signs that are or appear to be animated or projected. 
p.  Any sign affixed to a tree or utility pole. 
q.  Portable signs which are manifestly designed to be transported as a trailer, on its own wheels even where the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis may be permanently attached to the ground. 
r.  Primary signs with a noncommercial message. 
s.  Any off-premise sign. 
t.  Any vehicular sign located on a truck, bus, trailer, taxi or other vehicle used for the purpose of advertisement on private property or on the public right-of-way. The only exception is a vehicle used as transportation for the owner or employee of the business that is moved daily on and off the property. 
(6)  Street signage. Traffic or other directional, way finding or traffic control signs or devices erected by any federal, state or local government shall be mounted on decorative poles and the back of the sign shall be painted black. Whenever such signs are for the benefit of or upon request by private development the sign and pole shall be paid by the project requesting or benefiting from the sign. Chanel poles are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-016, § 1, 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2018-051, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18; Ord. No. 2020-042, § 1(Exh. A), 10-27-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-016, § 1, adopted April 28, 2015, amended § 3-9-50 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-9-50, pertained to Manasota Key zoning district overlay, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-010, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 2005; Ord. No. 2005-067, § 1, adopted Aug. 16, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-006, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-007, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-069, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 15, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-015, §§ 1—7, adopted April 17, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-093, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2007; Ord. No. 2013-028, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 2013; and Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014. 
Sec. 3-9-51. - Babcock overlay zoning district. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Establishment; short title. The Babcock overlay zoning district is hereby established. The short title of this section shall be the "Babcock Zoning Code." 
(2)  District boundary. The area affected by this Babcock overlay zoning district shall be the area as shown in the zoning atlas. 
(3)  Intent. The intent of the Babcock overlay zoning district ("district") is to establish the regulations for design and development that address the qualities of nature and community that are envisioned for the Babcock community. The district is intended to accommodate compact development patterns, interconnected open space, native habitat, and recreation. The intended activities within the district include a mix of residential, retail and office commercial, light industrial, civic and educational facilities, open space, parks and recreational and institutional uses. 
(4)  Applicability; conflict with other ordinances; exemptions. The maximum development within this zoning overlay classification is controlled by the development of regional impact master development order, incremental development orders and the comprehensive plan. All new development and future redevelopment within the district shall be subject to these regulations. The terms development and redevelopment shall be construed liberally and shall include any plat, special exception, variance, site plan approval, building or sign permit, or any other official action of Charlotte County that has the effect of permitting development and/or redevelopment or any application for any of the preceding matters. Except where expressly provided herein, the terms of the Babcock Zoning Code shall supersede and control in the event and to the extent of a conflict between the Babcock Zoning Code and another provision of the County Code. Due to the unique circumstances of the property, the following specific exemptions are granted: 
a.  Landscape and tree requirements. Approximately 7,725 acres within the district are to be developed, the majority of which were agricultural lands at the time of adoption of this Babcock Zoning Code, and over 5,700 acres within the district are to be preserved, the majority of which are wooded. This results in 5,975,492 removal tree points and 32,002,479 preservation tree points (not including Palmettos and Wax Myrtles). Due to the unique circumstances of the property and the excess of preservation tree points, all development within the district is exempt from the county tree removal permit process and article XVIII of chapter 3-5, landscaping and buffers requirements of the County Code and article IX of chapter 3-2, tree requirements, of the County Code. The landscape requirements of the Babcock Zoning Code provided herein are applicable. 
(5)  Use of pattern books for development. Pattern books may be submitted to define development parameters and design standards applicable within a defined site, area or subdistrict to establish some or all of the governing design parameters and standards, which may constitute waivers of submittal requirements and deviations, including but not limited to: setbacks, building heights, building orientation, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, signage, density, intensity, lot sizes, coverages, and standards for roadway design and rights-of-way. Approval of pattern books shall be issued by the zoning official or designee (zoning official) upon finding that standards, waivers, and deviations are consistent with public health, safety and welfare. An amendment to an approved pattern book may be requested at any time, to be approved by the zoning official. Approval of pattern books and pattern book amendments shall not be unreasonably withheld, and if approval is not granted by the zoning official within 30 days of submittal, the pattern book shall be subject to review and approval by the board of county commissioners. Where standards defined in an approved pattern book conflict with provisions of the Babcock Zoning Code or the County Code, the pattern book shall apply. Development in areas that are not subject to a pattern book shall be governed by the standards and provisions set forth in this Babcock Zoning Code. 
(6)  Existing uses. The Babcock Zoning Code shall not render an existing use, including, but not limited to mining, silviculture, agriculture and sod farming, on a parcel as nonconforming, even if such existing use is not a principal use or a permitted accessory use in the applicable subdistrict. Any such existing use shall not be considered nonconforming, and may be continued and expanded with appropriate permitting as required. 
(7)  Establishment of subdistricts. The following subdistricts are established to allow for different forms of development within the district, as depicted on the Babcock Overlay Zoning District - Subdistrict Map: 
•  Mixed use residential commercial (MURC). 
•  North Babcock. 
•  Greenways. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Terms used in this section shall have their commonly accepted meaning unless they are defined in (b). When terms are defined both in this section and elsewhere in the County Code, definitions for such terms in this subsection shall control. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection: 
Agriculture uses: Agriculture uses within the district includes such uses as agricultural production (crops, citrus, landscape nursery, ranching, livestock raising and animal specialties, pasture, sod and grazing); silviculture, agricultural services, cultural, educational and/or eco-tourism uses and support facilities and their related modes of transporting participants, viewers, or patrons; tour operations, such as, but not limited to airboats, swamp buggies, horse and similar modes of transportation; agricultural labor housing; excavation and earthmoving incidental to agricultural operations; farm products warehousing and storage; single-family detached dwelling unit; forestry; hunting; riding stables; research facilities; noncommercial kennels; telecommunication towers; outdoor shooting ranges; and aquaculture. 
Alley: A right-of-way providing a secondary means of access and service to abutting property. For purposes of determining setbacks or required yards, the lot line along an alley is never a front lot line. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the greater of: (1) the FEMA first habitable floor elevation requirement, (2) eighteen (18) inches above the elevation of the average crown of the adjacent roads; or (3) the average natural grade (the natural contours of a land area generally unaltered by human intervention) to the highest point of a flat roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 
Civic, government, and institutional uses: Structures developed for and/or used by established organizations or foundations dedicated to public service or cultural activities including, but not limited to, the arts, education, government and religion. 
District: shall mean the Babcock overlay zoning district. 
Eco-tourism: The practice of touring natural habitats and support facilities thereof in a manner meant to minimize ecological impact. Eco-tourism is considered a commercial enterprise located in an agricultural or preservation area intended to attract tourists and provide supplemental income for the property owner. Eco-tourism uses include, but are not limited to: transient guest lodging, hunting, nature trails, canoeing, fishing, wildlife observation, and birding. 
Encroachments: Physical structures that reach into or above a required yard or a right-of-way or roadway easement. Encroachments are not allowed unless identified as permissible. 
Guest unit, accessory: An accessory dwelling which is attached to or detached from a principal dwelling located on the same residential parcel and which serves as an ancillary use providing living quarters and which may contain kitchen facilities. Accessory guest units are not considered dwelling units for purposes of density. 
Parking lot: An outdoor area or space, paved or unpaved, designed and constructed for the purpose of motor vehicle parking or storage. A driveway that does not contain or provide access to delineated parking spaces is not a parking lot. 
Pathway: A defined corridor within the district's overall transportation network designed to accommodate pedestrians and other alternative modes of transportation. 
Pattern book: A set of development parameters and design standards applicable within a defined site, area or subdistrict to establish some or all of the governing design parameters and standards, which may constitute waivers of submittal requirements and deviations, including but not limited to: setbacks, building heights, building orientation, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, signage, density, intensity, lot sizes, coverages, and standards for roadway design and rights-of-way. 
Setback: The minimum distance between a right-of-way line, property line, bulkhead line, shoreline, seawall, ordinary high water line (OHWL), access easement line or other defined location whichever is the most restrictive, and the beginning point of the buildable area. Setbacks may be measured from the legal boundary of a lot and are inclusive of easements with the exception of easements that comprise a road right-of-way. For purposes of determining setbacks, the lot line along an alley is never a front lot line. 
Transient guest lodging: A building or group of buildings operated for commercial purposes, and therefore not considered residential units for purposes of density, in which sleeping accommodations and sanitary facilities are offered to guests and intended for use on a daily or weekly basis, irrespective of the form of ownership, and which may include kitchens in each unit. 
(c)  Subdistricts within the Babcock overlay zoning district. 
(1)  Mixed use residential commercial (MURC). The MURC subdistrict shall be the most diverse subdistrict, with a full range of uses to support a live, work, shop, play environment. The MURC subdistrict may include residential, commercial, recreational, civic, industrial, and mixed uses. The MURC is to be developed according to a town center, village and hamlet framework that is further defined by pattern book. Buildings may be single or multiuse. Parking shall be provided on-street, off-street, and within parking structures. 
a.  Permitted principal uses and structures. Permitted principal uses within the MURC subdistrict include any and all uses not listed as prohibited uses in (d)(3), including, but not limited to: commercial businesses and services, retail, office, civic, education (elementary, middle, high schools, colleges and universities), institutional, light industrial and manufacturing, mining, earthmoving, nurseries, essential services, single family and multifamily residential, assisted living facilities, continuing care retirement communities, transient guest lodging including hotel, motel and bed and breakfast, home occupations per (d)(11), parks, recreation, manufacturing, distribution, wholesale, warehouse, processing and packaging, laboratories and clinics, research, design and product development. Mixed use buildings and single use buildings are permitted. Any use not listed may be deemed permitted by the zoning official by a finding that the use is reasonable according to the intent of the subdistrict; similar to another permitted use in the subdistrict; and not specifically prohibited in the subdistrict. 
b.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and structures include all uses that support or relate to principal uses, including accessory guest units that are attached or detached in conjunction with single family residential dwellings, except as otherwise prohibited herein. 
c.  MURC development standards. 
Table 1. MURC Development Standards 

 
  
Notes: 
(1) Unless otherwise noted, setbacks apply to principal and accessory structures. Structures will comply with sight distance requirements. Building separation shall be at least ten (10) feet, subject to access requirements for emergency services and fire code. 
(2) May be reduced as long as sum of side setbacks is ten (10) feet minimum. 
(3) Setback applies to interior lots. If not connected to an adjoining structure, side setback is five feet which may be reduced as long as sum of side setbacks is ten (10) feet minimum. 
(4) Schools are exempt from this setback table, school development is according Charlotte County School District policy. 
(5) Encroachments into front yards are allowed for porches, stoops, awnings, colonnades, or other elements that serve as transition from the public to the private realm. 
(6) It must be demonstrated that driveways can accommodate space for parking for at least two (2) vehicles on the driveway without overhanging onto the adjoining sidewalk, or onto vehicle travelway where no sidewalk exists. If on-street parking spaces are available in the right-of-way within three hundred (300) feet, on-street parking may substitute for driveway parking. 
(7) Building entrances are required on the primary street. 
(8) Maximum area per use is three thousand (3,000) square feet. Total neighborhood goods and services permitted in one (1) location is fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(9) Multi-family buildings with two (2) or less bedrooms per unit shall require one (1) space per unit. Multifamily buildings with three (3) or more bedrooms per unit shall require one and one-half (1.5) spaces per unit. 
(10) The amount of required parking may be determined through a parking analysis submitted with a site plan application. 
(11) At the town center entries, the shopping and entertainment areas shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the ultimate road right-of-way of SR 31. For the remainder of the town center, the shopping and entertainment areas shall be set back a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the ultimate road right-of-way of SR 31. The shopping and entertainment areas of the villages and hamlets shall be located in the interior portion of those areas. (Ref. Sierra Club Settlement Agreement Section B.8.) 
(12) Encroachments are allowed for structures such as boardwalks, docks, and accessory structures providing views and access to water, subject to approval from agencies with jurisdiction. 
1.  Encroachments: The following standards pertain to yard and right-of-way encroachments: 
i.  Yard encroachments. Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed by the principal structure from thirty (30) inches above the ground, as measured from the average elevation of the crown of road along the property frontage. Permissible encroachments into required yards are limited to the following: pool equipment, generators, air conditioning equipment, cornices, overhangs, decorative awnings, gutters, eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, means of egress, and any other structure deemed similar in nature by the zoning official. Accessory structures including, but not limited to, refuse containers, loading docks, flagpoles, play equipment, fences, walls, wires, lights, mailboxes, open air arbors, open air trellises, open air pergolas, open air chickees and outdoor furniture are not considered encroachments and are therefore allowed. Structures less than thirty (30) inches in height, including but not limited to pools, bermed earth, plant materials, driveways and pathways, are not considered encroachments in required yards and are therefore allowed. 
ii.  Right-of-way or roadway easement encroachments. Allowable encroachments into rights-of-way or roadway easements are limited to the following: awnings, arcades, colonnades, pedestrian bridges, balconies, planters, outdoor dining, and any other structure deemed similar in nature by the zoning official. A minimum six-foot clear pedestrian way shall be maintained and not obstructed by any encroachment. Encroachments shall maintain a clear distance of nine (9) feet above the sidewalk and fifteen (15) feet above the street measured from the elevation of the crown of the street if the encroachment passes over vehicle travel lanes. 
2.  Density: Maximum net density for residential is twenty-four (24) units per acre in town center and sixteen (16) units per acre in villages and hamlets. Accessory guest units, attached or detached, in conjunction with single family residential dwellings are not considered toward density calculations. 
3.  Parking: A parking needs analysis may be approved by the zoning official to determine the appropriate number and location of parking spaces for any use based on characteristics of the use, hours of operation, sound planning principles, shared parking agreements or trip management techniques to be implemented. In the absence of a parking needs analysis, the following number of parking spaces shall be provided on-site, unless otherwise provided: 
i.  Single family detached, zero lot line, two-family and single-family attached: Minimum of one (1) on-site parking space inclusive of driveways and garage space. One (1) additional parking space is required for an accessory guest unit, which may be on-site or dedicated on-street parking within three hundred (300) feet of the unit it serves. 
ii.  Multifamily: A minimum of one (1) on-site parking space is required for units with two (2) or fewer bedrooms. A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) on-site parking spaces is required for units with three (3) or more bedrooms. Additional parking may be provided on-site or as dedicated on-street parking within three hundred (300) feet of the unit it serves. 
iii.  Nonresidential: Nonresidential uses shall provide a minimum of one (1) on-site parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area. 
iv.  Mixed use: Mixed use buildings shall provide the total number of parking spaces required for the residential and nonresidential occupancies. 
4.  Minimum landscape requirements: 
i.  General tree planting requirements shall be: 
(A)  For every lot, a minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted in the front yard or in the right-of-way in front of the lot; or 
(B)  Street trees planted in or adjacent to the right-of-way with a minimum spacing of one (1) tree every sixty (60) feet on average. 
ii.  The following perimeter landscaping requirements apply to development requiring site plan review: 
(A)  A minimum of one (1) shrub per ten (10) linear feet of front property line shall be planted in a hedge row or otherwise clustered within the front yard. 
(B)  For landscape buffer areas that serve as transition between intense uses and residential uses per (c)(1)c.5.ii., a minimum of one (1) shrub per ten (10) linear feet of property line shall be planted in a hedge row or otherwise clustered in the transitional landscape buffer area. 
(C)  Substitution of trees for shrubs is permitted at a rate of one (1) tree per three (3) shrubs. 
(D)  The location of required plantings may be any of the following: in-ground planting areas, raised planters, or planter boxes. 
(E)  In addition to the preceding provisions (a) through (d), wherever a parking lot abuts public rights-of-way along a front property line, a hedge, or durable nonvegetative barrier, or combination thereof, at least three (3) feet in height, shall be placed along the entire length of the front property line, except within sight triangles. Wherever nonvegetative barriers are employed, one (1) shrub or vine shall be planted for every eight (8) linear feet, distributed evenly or in clusters. 
iii.  Parking area requirements: For parking constructed of impervious material, planter islands shall be constructed to interrupt rows of parking. The maximum number of parking spaces between planter islands is fifteen (15) spaces. Minimum dimension for a planter island is nine (9) feet. Each planter island must contain at least one (1) tree maintained with a minimum six (6) feet of clear trunk measured from the ground up. Planter islands are not required for parking constructed of pervious material. 
5.  Standards specific to mixed use and nonresidential uses: 
i.  Loading docks and refuse containers and facilities shall generally be placed to the rear or side yard of the building. Refuse containers shall be hidden by an opaque wall or fencing of sufficient height to screen the bin and any appurtenances, but not less than five (5) feet in height. Walls shall be constructed of a material compatible with the principal structure it is serving. Trash containers serving nonresidential uses shall be screened from view from abutting residential property, but refuse area enclosures are not required to be gated or otherwise closed off. 
ii.  Transition of intensity. Transition between intense uses (including industrial, manufacturing, distribution, repair shops, car washes, wholesale, warehouse, processing and packaging, mining, laboratories and clinics, research, design and product development, and gas stations) and residential uses should be addressed through building orientation, site design, landscape buffering or the placement of less intense uses to provide transition, such as commercial, office, civic, institutional, governmental or recreation. 
(2)  North Babcock subdistrict. The North Babcock subdistrict is envisioned to be an educational and recreational center with uses that represent a long-term preservation and development plan. The subdistrict is intended to provide opportunities for the public to explore and enjoy ecosystems and natural resources. 
a.  Permitted principal uses and structures. Permitted uses within the North Babcock subdistrict include: Caretakers and operating staff quarters; eco-tourism lodge; sports lodge; hunting club; transient guest lodging; environmental education and research center (excluding bio-genetic research on animals and/or plants); riding stables; equestrian facility and accessory uses; recreational vehicle (RV) park; youth camp; open storage for vehicles, recreational vehicles (RVs), boats, trailers, recreational equipment, and similar items; civic; institutional; schools; churches; agricultural; conservation areas and associated boardwalks, observation decks, restroom facilities, and paved or unpaved trails including trails to accommodate multimodal transit, such as golf carts or other electric vehicles; land management activities including but not limited to, hunting, ecological burning, ecosystem restoration, hydrologic restoration, transportation and utility crossings, stormwater management, habitat restoration, earthmoving and other similar uses; alternative energy use: alternative energy and ancillary facilities including, but not limited to support offices; maintenance facilities to support the uses found in this section; community infrastructure uses and facilities, including utilities and fill storage, stock piling, and clearing; parks; cell towers; temporary uses customarily associated with development such as sales centers and modular buildings; commercial uses which are customarily associated with the uses permitted within the subdistrict. Any use not listed that is deemed by the zoning official to be reasonable according to the intent of the subdistrict; similar to another permitted use in the subdistrict; and not specifically prohibited in the subdistrict per (d)(3). 
b.  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Permitted accessory uses and structures include all uses customarily incidental to principal uses and structures. 
c.  North Babcock development standards. 
Table 2. North Babcock Development Standards 

 
  
1.  Yard encroachments: Every part of every required yard shall be open and unobstructed by the principal structure from thirty (30) inches above the ground, as measured from the average elevation of the crown of road along the property frontage, except for the following encroachments permitted to extend into the required setback a maximum distance of fifty (50) percent of the required setback: pool equipment, generators, air conditioning equipment, cornices, overhangs, decorative awnings, gutters, eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, means of egress, and any other structure deemed similar in nature by the zoning official. Accessory structures including, but not limited to, loading docks, refuse containers, flagpoles, play equipment, fences, walls, wires, lights, mailboxes, open air arbors, open air trellises, open air pergolas, open air chickees and outdoor furniture are not considered encroachments and are therefore allowed. Structures less than thirty (30) inches in height, including but not limited to pools, bermed earth, plant materials, driveways and pathways, are not considered encroachments in required yards and are therefore allowed. 
2.  Parking and loading: The following parking and loading standards apply in the North Babcock subdistrict: 
i.  Number of off-street parking. A parking needs analysis may be approved by the zoning official to determine the appropriate number of parking spaces for any use based on characteristics of the use, hours of operation, sound planning principles, or trip management techniques to be implemented. In the absence of a parking needs analysis, a minimum of one (1) off-street parking space inclusive of garage space shall be provided per: 
(A)  Lodge unit. 
(B)  Caretaker quarters unit. 
(C)  Riding stable. 
(D)  Every ten (10) recreational vehicle (RV) spaces. 
(E)  Every six campsites. 
(F)  Four hundred (400) square feet of assembly use. 
(G)  One thousand (1,000) square feet of equestrian facility. 
ii.  Parking surface material. Gravel, shell, and other permeable surface materials are encouraged for the North Babcock Area. Paving is permitted in areas that otherwise, without paving, would create a detrimental health, safety, or welfare impact. 
iii.  Loading docks and refuse containers. Loading docks and refuse containers and facilities shall generally be placed to the rear or side yard of the building. Refuse containers shall be hidden by an opaque wall or fencing of sufficient height to screen the bin and any appurtenances, but not less than five (5) feet in height. Walls shall be constructed of a material compatible with the principal structure it is serving, but refuse area enclosures are not required to be gated or otherwise closed off. 
3.  Landscaping: For parking lots constructed of impervious material, planter islands shall be constructed to interrupt rows of parking. The maximum number of parking spaces between planter islands is fifteen (15) spaces. Minimum dimension for a planter island is nine (9) feet. Each planter island must contain at least one (1) tree maintained with a minimum six (6) feet of clear trunk measured from the ground up. Planter islands are not required for parking constructed of pervious material. No other landscaping or tree points are required for development within the North Babcock subdistrict, as the area is surrounded by greenways which contain preserved natural areas. 
(3)  Greenway subdistrict. The greenway subdistrict consists of all lands within the overall boundary of this district that are not otherwise within the limits of any other subdistrict identified herein. Greenways may be environmentally sensitive lands, natural resource areas, or trails. The Babcock Overlay Zoning District - Subdistrict Map conceptually depicts four (4) greenway categories (active, passive, observation and corridor) based on functional level of public use and natural resource protection. 
a.  Permitted principal uses and structures. Permitted uses within all greenways include essential services, hunting, passive recreation, ecological burning, ecosystem restoration and hydrologic restoration. Permitted activities in each greenway category are described further below: 
1.  Active greenways provide passive and active recreational opportunities. Permitted uses include neighborhood parks, picnic areas and playgrounds, camping, equestrian use, boardwalks and observation decks, paved trails to accommodate multimodal transit, such as golf carts or other electric vehicles, active parks with ball fields (including restrooms and concession facilities), golf courses, education facilities and similar uses. Other permitted activities include nurseries, transportation and utility crossings, stormwater management, habitat restoration, earthmoving, renewable energy systems and facilities, such as, but not limited to, a solar photovoltaic (PV) electrical generation facility or wind generation turbines, and other similar uses. All uses shall be designed to minimize impacts to native vegetation, flowways and wetlands as permitted by the appropriate state or federal review agency having jurisdiction, if any. 
2.  Passive greenways provide passive recreational opportunities. Permitted uses include neighborhood parks, picnic areas and playgrounds, primitive camping, equestrian use, hiking trails, boardwalks and observation decks, paved trails and similar uses. Other allowable uses may include transportation and utility crossings, stormwater management, habitat restoration, earthmoving and other similar uses. All uses shall be designed to minimize impacts to native vegetation, flowways and wetlands as permitted by the appropriate state or federal review agency having jurisdiction, if any. 
3.  Corridor greenway. The corridor greenway is a wildlife corridor between Telegraph Swamp and the Curry Lake area intended to promote the movement of wildlife, and to be protected in perpetuity by an appropriate conservation easement. Permitted uses are limited to passive recreation, hiking trails, boardwalks, observation decks, land management, habitat restoration, earthmoving and similar uses. 
4.  Observation greenway. Observation greenways consist primarily of native vegetative communities and are largely unimpacted by agricultural activities. Permitted uses are limited to conservation, hiking trails, boardwalks and observation decks, and pathways. Other allowable uses may include transportation and utility crossings, earthmoving and habitat restoration. All uses shall be designed to minimize impacts to native vegetation, flowways and wetlands as permitted by the appropriate state or federal review agency having jurisdiction, if any. 
b.  Minimum landscape requirements: No landscaping or tree points are required for projects within the Greenways, as overall the Greenways contain thousands of acres of preserved trees and natural plants. 
(d)  Provisions and uses common to the district. 
(1)  Intent. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to the Babcock overlay zoning district. Uses and standards included in this subsection apply throughout all areas of the district. 
(2)  Principal uses and structures: Certain uses and structures are permitted by right throughout the district. 
a.  Maintenance facilities, community services, including required infrastructure and public facilities, nurseries, co-op farmland, civic uses, education, research and eco-tourism facilities, agriculture, mining, earthmoving, parks, cell towers, ropes courses, tree houses, utilities, and temporary uses customarily associated with development such as sales centers, models, temporary housing for construction workers are permitted throughout the district. 
b.  Babcock Ranch Community Master Development of Regional Impact Development Order is approved for land encompassing the district. State and federal permits are issued for a series of lakes to be constructed within the district. Charlotte County shall issue permits and/or permit extensions for those lakes permitted by the state or federal agencies without regard to the limitations contained within the Charlotte County Earthmoving Code, provided that the fill from those lakes currently permitted under EarthSource Mine Permit #07-EX-16, or an extension or modification thereof, may be removed from the district, but those lakes not yet under a county earthmoving permit shall retain the fill material within the district. 
(3)  Prohibited uses: Explosives manufacturing, animal slaughterhouses, and sexually oriented businesses. 
(4)  Fill storage, stockpiling, and clearing. 
a.  Fill storage: Fill storage is generally permitted as a principal use throughout the district. Fill material may be transported to and stockpiled upon areas that have been disturbed or farmed or are shown as development areas on an approved site plan or final plat. Following approval of a site plan, or final plat, development areas including building pads, shall be allowed to be cleared prior to the issuance of the building permits. A revegetation bond shall not be required for clearing of development areas included in an approved site plan or final plat. 
b.  Stockpile: Stockpile areas shall be designated as one (1) of the following: 
1.  Long-term stockpile area defined as a stockpile area to be left in place for a period greater than six (6) months. Such long-term stockpile areas shall be sodded or hydroseeded and erosion control devices installed when such stockpile is not actively in use. 
2.  Temporary stockpile area defined as a stockpile area to be left in place for a period of six (6) months or less. Contractor shall employ methods in accordance with section 3-5-95 of the County Code or best management practices to prevent erosion of stockpiles. 
3.  Fencing (plastic barricading, silt fence or other similar visible barriers) shall be provided in accordance with applicable state and federal permitting. 
(5)  Setbacks to water. For any manmade or natural lake, pond, and stormwater facility within the district, standard setbacks are zero (0) feet; buildings and structures may extend over water. 
(6)  Bulkhead/retaining walls. Bulkhead/retaining walls are allowed as permitted in the environmental resources permit (ERP) process. 
(7)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be permitted throughout the district. All fences and walls, including refuse or trash container enclosures, are not considered accessory structures and shall be permitted throughout the district. Fences and walls shall be located and constructed in accordance with section 3-9-72 of the County Code except as may be otherwise provided in this Babcock Zoning Code or as approved through a pattern book. Fences and walls shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, measured relative to the greater of the crown of the adjacent roadway or the adjacent minimum finished floor, as applicable. Fencing and wall materials may be made of wood, vinyl, iron, or masonry products. 
(8)  Landscaping. Due to the unique circumstances of the property and the excess of preservation tree points, all development within the district is exempt from the county tree removal permit process and is subject only to the landscape requirements of the Babcock Zoning Code provided herein. 
(9)  Roadway sections, access standards and block length. 
a.  Design of roadways, paths, rights-of-way, or roadway easements shall be according to Florida Greenbook Standards, with deviations and modifications permitted by approval by the county engineer or approval of a pattern book. 
b.  The minimum number of access points for vehicular ingress and egress serving a subdivision is one (1). 
c.  Sidewalks are required on at least one (1) side of roadways within the town center. 
d.  There are no minimum or maximum block lengths. 
(10)  Signs. All signs shall conform to the following general sign provisions applicable throughout the district: 
a.  For signs proposed within a county or state dedicated right-of-way, a right-of-way permit is required. 
b.  Signs are not subject to setbacks, as long as the signs are located so as not to cause sight line obstructions. 
c.  Sign area shall be calculated as the area within the smallest regular geometric shape or combination of shapes that incorporates the advertised use. Only one (1) side of a multisided sign shall be calculated as "sign area." 
d.  Sign illumination shall not exceed ten (10) candlepower per square foot, as measured ten (10) feet from the sign. Lights must be shielded from direct view. 
e.  Primary nonresidential sign standards. Primary signs include any permanent freestanding or building sign. Primary signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the crown of the adjoining roadway. Primary signs may have either digital or mechanical changeable copy, provided the message is not animated and that the message remains static for at least fifteen (15) seconds between cycles. The following primary signs are permitted to be arranged within a cumulative maximum sign area allowance per unit equal to three (3) times the unit's linear feet of right-of-way or building frontage, whichever is greater, not to exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of signage: 
1.  Nonresidential freestanding signs: Each commercial unit is allowed one (1) sign per roadway frontage, with a sign area not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. For multitenant commercial properties, each individual storefront unit qualifies as a commercial unit, provided that a multitenant parcel shall not be entitled to more than one (1) freestanding primary sign per right-of-way. For properties with multiple right-of-way frontages, signs must be located to provide a minimum separation of one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Nonresidential building signs: Each commercial unit is allowed unlimited building signage so long as the cumulative maximum sign area allowance is not exceeded, with no individual building sign area to exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
f.  Secondary nonresidential sign standards. In addition to primary signs, the following secondary signs are allowed for each commercial unit: 
1.  Wall placard: A placard sign affixed directly to an exterior wall or fence with maximum sign area of twenty-four (24) square feet. 
2.  Projecting: A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building with the display of the sign perpendicular to the building wall, with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) square feet. 
3.  Hanging: A sign attached to and located below any eave, canopy or awning, with a maximum sign area of twelve (12) square feet. 
4.  Awning: A sign or graphic attached to or printed on an awning or umbrella, with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) pages of the awning or umbrella area. 
5.  Directional, wayfinding or educational signage: A sign that is secured to a base which is built directly upon the ground or mounted on railings or observation decks, with a maximum sign area of twenty (20) square feet, exclusive of the base. 
6.  Sandwich boards: A portable sign comprised of two (2) sign panels hinged together at the top, with maximum sign area of twelve (12) square feet (two (2) faces at twelve (12) square feet each). 
g.  Primary residential sign standards. 
1.  Boundary marker: One (1) boundary marker or monument may be located at each corner of neighborhoods or subdivisions to include the name of the neighborhood or subdivision, and the insignia or logo, provided that the sign area, comprising name, insignia and logo, may not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet and may not exceed the height or length of the monument or structure upon which it is located. 
2.  Entrance signs: A maximum of three (3) ground or wall-mounted entrance signs may be located at a neighborhood or subdivision entrance. Such signs may be used to identify the location of neighborhoods, districts, recreation areas, etc. Sign area shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet, and the sign shall not exceed the height or length of the wall or monument upon which it is located. 
h.  Other signs. In addition to the signs listed above, the following other signs are allowed throughout the district: 
1.  Temporary signs: Temporary signs are permitted, including project identification, boundary marker, real estate, sales center identification, and directional signs. Each sign may not exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet in area, and may not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. Temporary signs may remain in place simultaneously with primary signage until the Babcock Charlotte community reaches ninety-nine (99) percent build-out. 
2.  Special event signs: Special event signs, with sign area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, may be displayed to announce or advertise such activities as open houses, grand openings, community fairs or programs or charitable, or educational events. 
3.  Construction entrance signs: Two (2) construction entrance signs may be located at appropriate distances ahead of each construction entrance. Each sign area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
4.  Traffic signs: Traffic signs such as street signs, stop signs, and speed limit signs may be designed to reflect a common architectural theme. Traffic signs shall meet all FDOT safety standards. 
5.  Community gateways shall be considered where the district interfaces with the external community along State Road 31. Community gateway signage shall be approved as part of a pattern book. 
(11)  Home occupations. Home occupations shall be allowed in conjunction with any residential use subject to the standards provided herein. 
a.  Home occupations shall be subordinate and incidental to the primary residential use. 
b.  Home occupations shall be conducted by the residents of the principal dwelling unit and not more than one (1) nonresident employee. 
c.  Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit or accessory structure. 
d.  No home occupation shall utilize any process or equipment with a potential for creating a life/safety hazard, as may be determined by the zoning official or fire marshall. 
e.  The floor area of the home occupation within the principal building shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the total residential floor area. 
f.  No merchandise shall be stored on the premises, except such merchandise that can be produced on the premises. Other merchandise may be kept on the premises temporarily prior to distribution to the consumer. No merchandise, goods, supplies, equipment, or materials shall be displayed or stored outdoors. 
g.  No alterations to the exterior or interior of structures, temporary or permanent, that change the essential residential character of the land or structures on a lot shall be permitted, except that one (1) nonilluminated nameplate or wall placard, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be attached to the building on or next to the entrance. 
h.  The creation of noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference that has an adverse impact on nearby properties is not permitted. 
i.  The creation of visual or audible interference with any radio, television, phone, or internet connection off the premises, or the creation of fluctuations in line voltage off the premises, is not permitted. 
j.  The following are not permitted as home occupations: detailing, servicing or repairing of motor vehicles; grooming, treating, boarding or propagating animals, poultry or livestock; production of pornographic material; or the medical care or treatment of persons such as medical practices or nursing facilities (however, home child daycare services, certified massage therapists and licensed psychologists and psychiatrists are allowed). 
(e)  Special provisions for development approval within the district. 
(1)  An interdepartmental review team may be established to ensure orderly consideration of all applications subject to review and to streamline the review process for projects within the district. 
(2)  Any application for county development permit within the district must be accompanied by documentation of approval by the master developer, or its successor or assign, in order for the application to be accepted by the county. 
(3)  Subdivision/construction plans. Subdivision — construction plans and plats shall follow the procedures and authorization provisions of chapter 3-7 of the County Code, subject to exceptions enumerated herein and modifications and waivers granted through approval of a pattern book. 
a.  Submission, review, and approval of subdivision plats for the project may be accomplished in phases to correspond with the planned development of the property. 
b.  Construction plans may be submitted, reviewed, and approved concurrently with plat applications. 
c.  Preliminary and final plat applications may be concurrently reviewed and processed for approval. 
d.  Determination of the adequacy of public facilities may be stipulated at time of construction plan approval and plat approval on the condition that connection to water and sewer service facilities is demonstrated at time of certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Assurance of completion of improvements. Subdivision plats may be accepted if all infrastructure is not constructed, provided that security in the form of a surety or cash performance bond is posted with the board of county commissioners and made payable to the county in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the full cost of installing the remaining required improvements approved by the county for each phase of development. In the event that the improvements are not completed per the applicable development agreement, it is understood that: (1) the county may request and/or utilize the full amount of the bond at its sole and absolute discretion, (2) because there are no third parties to this agreement, no third parties can or should rely on this agreement and/or bond, including but not limited to future lot owners, successor and assigns, and (3) nothing shall be construed as the county voluntarily assuming the obligation to perform any act of construction or maintenance under this agreement and/or the bond. Upon county acceptance of any portion of the infrastructure, the surety or cash performance bond may be adjusted and renewed at any time at one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completing remaining required improvements until completion. The board may also accept letters of credit or escrow account agreements or other forms of security provided the county attorney approves the document. 
(5)  Construction trailers, sales centers and model homes. Model homes, sales centers, sales offices, construction offices, and other uses and structures related to the promotion and sale of real estate shall be permitted as either "wet" or "dry" facilities. A "dry" facility allows for the issuance of a building permit for a structure to be used temporarily under a conditional certificate of occupancy for sales, display and promotion before connections to a central water and wastewater utility are available. "Dry" facilities are not to be occupied by sales staff. Connections to a central water and wastewater utility are required for a "dry" facility to be converted for permanent certificate of occupancy as a dwelling unit. A "wet" facility is equipped with water and wastewater and can be occupied by sales staff and used for sales, display and promotion under a conditional certificate of occupancy. "Wet" facilities may use septic tanks or holding tanks for waste disposal subject to the Florida Administrative Code, and may use potable or irrigation wells. Connections to a central water and wastewater utility are required for a "wet" model home to be converted for permanent certificate of occupancy as a dwelling unit. 
a.  For each subdivision, the maximum allowable number of model homes is ten (10) or ten (10) percent of proposed dwelling units within the subdivision, whichever is greater. 
b.  Both "wet" and "dry" facilities may be constructed upon building permit approval following the first round of county review for plat approval, prior to final plat. 
c.  A "wet" facility may be served by a temporary utility system with ultimate connection to the central system. Interior fire protection facilities in accordance with NFPA requirements are required unless a permanent water system is available. 
d.  A water management plan shall be provided which accommodates water run-off from the facility, parking areas, access road/driveway and other impervious surfaces. 
e.  Site plan approval is required for sales centers and for "wet" models to function as sales offices. Site plan approval is not required for single family "dry" models or construction trailers. 
(6)  Site plan approval. The site plan approval process shall follow the procedures and authorization provisions of section 3-9-7 of the County Code, subject to exceptions herein and modifications and waivers granted through approval of a pattern book. 
(7)  Special exceptions. Special exceptions shall be subject to the procedures set forth in section 3-9-6.2 of the County Code. 
(8)  Waivers and deviations. 
a.  Waivers for relief from submittal requirements may be granted by the zoning official through approval of a pattern book or upon request at time of plan or plat application submittal to reduce the submittal requirements of chapter 3-7 and section 3-9-7 of the County Code. Once official copies of federal, state or regional permits and development approval records in effect for the district are established on file with the department of community development, requirements to submit copies of those permits or development approvals with plat, construction plan or site plan applications shall be waived to reduce the waste associated with duplication of multiple copies of documents as long as they are unchanged, because of the unique nature of the district, which will develop in a succession of phases, subject to multiple and extensive agency permitting documents. 
b.  Waivers and deviations may be granted through approval of pattern books as authorized in subsection (a)(5), which may define development and design standards applicable within a defined site, area, or subdistrict for matters including but not limited to setbacks, building heights, building orientation, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, signage, density, intensity, lot sizes, coverages, standards for roadway design and rights-of-way, waiver of submittal requirements, and deviations. Approval of pattern books shall be issued by the zoning official upon finding that standards, waivers, and deviations are consistent with public health, safety and welfare. An amendment to an approved pattern book may be requested at any time by the developer or applicant authorized by the developer, to be approved by the zoning official. Approval of pattern books and pattern book amendments shall not be unreasonably withheld, and if approval is not granted by the zoning official within thirty (30) days of submittal, the pattern book shall be subject to review and approval by the board of county commissioners. If standards defined in an approved pattern book conflict with provisions of this Babcock Zoning Code or the County Code, the pattern book shall apply. 
(9)  Summary phasing plan. A phasing plan is established to set forth the minimum nonresidential square footage required for the number of dwelling units at the time of issuance of certificate of occupancy of the last dwelling unit of any particular threshold. The phasing plan is subject to adjustment through the DRI, state, federal, or local permitting process. DRI incremental development orders shall establish the detailed phasing of development within the increment. The DRI incremental development orders shall determine the amount of residential and nonresidential development allocated within the town center, each village, and each hamlet, respectively, to ensure that development is orderly, maximize efficiency of infrastructure, and provide for specific infrastructure improvements needed to meet prescribed levels of service. The intent is that nonresidential uses will be provided to serve the occupancy of dwelling units. 
Table 3. Summary Phasing Plan 

 
*1 — All nonresidential square footage is cumulative by certificate of occupancy threshold. 
*2 — Nonresidential square footage threshold is minimum. 
(Ord. No. 2014-077, 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-51.1 - Babcock community pattern book. 
(a)  Pattern books may be submitted to define development parameters and design standards applicable within a defined site, area or subdistrict to establish some or all of the governing design parameters and standards, which may constitute waivers of submittal requirements and deviations, including but not limited to: setbacks, building heights, building orientation, parking, loading, landscaping, lighting, signage, density, intensity, lot sizes, coverages, and standards for roadway design and rights-of-way. Approval of pattern books shall be issued by the zoning official or designee (zoning official) upon finding that standards, waivers, and deviations are consistent with public health, safety and welfare. An amendment to an approved pattern book may be requested at any time, to be approved by the zoning official. Approval of pattern books and pattern book amendments shall not be unreasonably withheld, and if approval is not granted by the zoning official within thirty (30) days of submittal, the pattern book shall be subject to review and approval by the board of county commissioners. Where standards defined in an approved pattern book conflict with provisions of the Babcock Zoning Code or the County Code, the pattern book shall apply. Development in areas that are not subject to a pattern book shall be governed by the standards and provisions set forth in this Babcock Zoning Code. Approved pattern books shall be available for inspection at the community development department. 
(b)  The initial pattern book, submitted to Charlotte County in July 2014, is hereby approved by the board of county commissioners on November 25, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 2014-077, 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-52. - Bridgeless Barrier Island (BBI). 
(a)  Intent. The Bridgeless Barrier Island zoning district is intended to be used for residential dwellings and uses normally associated with residential dwellings. Some small commercial uses in support of the residential uses may also be allowed by special exception. The BBI zoning district is only allowed on those bridgeless barrier islands identified in the Smart Charlotte 2050 Barrier Island Overlay District, which are Little Gasparilla Island, Don Pedro Island, Knight Island and Thornton Key. 
(b)  Permitted principal uses and structures. The following uses and structures are permitted in this district: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings excluding mobile homes. 
(2)  Nonprofit parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Occupied single-family residences used as family day care homes. 
(c)  Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and structures are also permitted in this district. All permitted accessory structures are subject to the yard setback requirements of this section. Permitted accessory structures include: 
(1)  Private garage and storage structures subject to the following standards: 
a.  Metal buildings are limited to six hundred (600) square feet. 
b.  Accessory buildings over two hundred fifty (250) square feet must be compatible in appearance to the residence. 
c.  The total maximum coverage area of all accessory structures shall not exceed the greater of one thousand (1,000) square feet or one-half (½) the footprint of the principal structure. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit lot coverage in excess of the twenty (20) percent or thirty-five (35) percent maximum lot coverage established in subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  Greenhouses, growing of plants and horticultural specialties, provided no retail sales are made on the premises. 
(3)  Swimming pools. 
(4)  Tennis courts. 
(5)  Noncommercial boat docks. 
(d)  Prohibited uses and structure. Any use or structure not expressly or by reasonable implication permitted herein or permitted by special exception, including but not limited to mobile homes, parking lots and private clubs, shall be unlawful in this district. 
(e)  Special exceptions. (For procedure see section 3-9-7, "Special exceptions.") 
(1)  The following are special exceptions in this district: 
a.  Cluster houses and patio houses, provided a site plan is approved. 
b.  Houses of worship, in accordance with section 3-9-80.1, and community meeting halls. 
c.  Home occupations in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
d.  Child and adult day care facilities. 
e.  Essential services and emergency services. 
f.  The following special exception uses are permitted only within, and shall follow the development standards of, the LGI zoning district overlay: 
1.  Golf cart rental, sales, and service. 
2.  Barge and ferry landing sites. 
3.  Library. 
4.  Structures for the enclosed storage of trucks and other equipment used to service the electric, telephone, or water utilities. 
5.  Water utility treatment and distribution facilities. 
(f)  Such other uses as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee to be: 
(1)  Appropriate by reasonable implication and intent of the district. 
(2)  Similar to another use either explicitly permitted in that district or allowed by special exception. 
(3)  Not specifically prohibited in that district. 
The board of zoning appeals shall review a favorable determination of the zoning official under this provision at the time the special exception application is presented to it. An unfavorable determination of the zoning official or his/her designee shall be appealable pursuant to section 3-9-6 of these regulations. 
(g)  Development standards: 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-022, § 1, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-53. - Little Gasparilla Island zoning district overlay. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of the Little Gasparilla Island zoning district overlay (LGI overlay code) is to provide development standards for commercial uses not typically allowed within a residential zoning district in order to maintain the unique community on Little Gasparilla Island. 
(b)  Boundary. The LGI overlay code shall only apply to Little Gasparilla Island. 
(c)  General island-wide development standards. 
(1)  Metal buildings and metal paneling are prohibited. This does not apply to roofing material. 
(2)  Accessory buildings over one hundred twenty five (125) square feet shall be compatible in appearance with the primary structure. 
(d)  Specific special exception development standards. 
(1)  Home occupations shall be subject to the following condition: 
a.  Customers shall only visit between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(2)  Golf cart rental, sales, and service shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The total maximum size for a principal structure shall be one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
b.  The maximum lot coverage for the entire operation, including but not limited to, any structures, paved areas, and outside storage and display areas, shall be sixty (60) percent of the lot. 
(3)  Barge and ferry landing sites shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Minimum water frontage shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Docks and landing ramps shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from side lot lines. 
c.  Hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
d.  The parking and the storage of vehicles, equipment, or material on the site for longer than twenty-four (24) hours is prohibited. 
(e)  General special exception development standards. 
(1)  Principal structures shall imitate residential dwellings. This shall not apply to buildings used for essential and emergency services. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height. 
(3)  No less than three off-street golf cart parking spaces shall be provided per use. A golf cart parking space is defined as an area ten (10) feet long by six (6) feet wide. The total number of parking spaces shall be appropriate for the approved use. 
(4)  A walking path at least four (4) feet wide shall be provided from the parking area to the main entrance of the use. 
(5)  A landscaped buffer at least five (5) feet in width or a one-hundred-percent opaque fence at least six (6) feet high shall be required along rear and side yard property boundaries; chain link fencing with some type of screening material shall not be used to satisfy this requirement. If using landscaping: 
a.  A continuous hedge shall be planted within the buffer to provide screening between the use and adjacent properties. 
b.  The hedge species shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches upon planting and be spaced and maintained in order to form a continuous, solid visual screen within one (1) year from planting. 
c.  The hedge shall be a type that reaches at least sixty (60) inches upon maturity. 
(6)  No outdoor light pole or standard shall be higher than ten (10) feet. 
(7)  All lights shall be shielded to prevent glare onto neighboring properties, and shall be in accordance with chapter 3-5, article XII, Sea Turtle Protection. 
(8)  Signs shall conform to the signs provisions of this Code except as specified below: 
a.  The only additional signage allowed is window signs. Window signs shall display only the proprietor's name, business name, and property address. All letters and numbers shall be no more than two (2) inches in height. 
b.  Signs shall not be lighted. 
c.  No more than one building sign is permitted and they shall be constructed of the same material as the predominant material of the principal building. 
d.  Building sign colors shall reflect the predominant colors of the principal structure. 
e.  Building signs shall not exceed three (3) square feet in area. 
f.  No directional signs are permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2013-025, § 1, 7-23-13; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-052, § 1(Exh. A), 12-11-18) 
Sec. 3-9-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-077, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed § 3-9-54, which pertained to Babcock Ranch Overlay Zoning District and derived from Ord. No. 2006-058, § 1, adopted June 20, 2006. 
Sec. 3-9-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-050, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed § 3-9-55, which pertained to excavation and mining (EM) and derived from Ord. No. 2007-090, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2007. 
Secs. 3-9-56, 3-9-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of §§ 3-9-56 and 3-9-57 as new §§ 3-9-52 and 3-9-53. 
Secs. 3-9-58, 3-9-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 3-9-60. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations which supplement, modify or further explain rules and regulations found elsewhere in this chapter and, unless specifically noticed to the contrary, apply to all zoning districts. 
Regulations over and above those imposed by other sections of this article are necessary for certain uses which, because of their uniqueness of potential for substantial impact on surrounding land uses, warrant minimum standards which cannot properly be addressed in the development regulations set forth in specific districts. The purpose of this section is to set forth the detailed regulations, including but not limited to the bulk, layout, yard size, and lot area that apply to these uses. 
(Ord. No. 89-47, § 1, 6-22-89) 
Sec. 3-9-61. - Accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable limits on the outside storage and display of equipment and merchandise. These standards ensure that such display and storage contribute to the normal activities of a use while not creating a public health or safety hazard or a nuisance. 
(b)  Applicability. All outdoor uses regulated by this section shall require a special exception except when the total area used for outdoor retail sales and storage is ten (10) percent of the total leasable square footage of the primary building or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less. 
(c)  Accessory outdoor retail sales, display, and storage. 
(1)  Accessory outdoor retail sales, display. Outdoor retail sales and display that is accessory to a principal use must meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  All vending machines shall be located within a roofed shelter and architecturally consistent with the principal structure. 
b.  Sales areas may not occupy any required parking spaces, including any handicapped spaces. 
c.  Sales areas shall be arranged to allow at least four (4) feet of clear passage along the sidewalk or pedestrian way. 
d.  Galvanized or slatted chain link fencing may not be used to enclose sales areas. 
(2)  Accessory outdoor storage. Outdoor storage that is accessory to a principal use, excluding parking for fleet vehicles, must meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Storage areas are not permitted in front of the wall of the principal structure that is parallel to the front lot line. 
b.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
c.  Storage areas shall be screened with a minimum of eight-foot tall opaque wall or fence. 
d.  Storage areas may not occupy any required parking spaces, including any handicapped spaces. 
(3)  Outdoor market and exhibition space. Outdoor markets and exhibition spaces must meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  Prior to establishment of the use, site plan approval must be obtained. 
b.  All electrical systems shall require an electrical permit and inspection. 
c.  All lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
d.  Any amplified sound shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties. 
e.  Adequate sanitary facilities must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-068, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-62. - Assisted living facility. 
This section provides minimum regulations and standards for an assisted living facility (ALF). 
(a)  Location. 
(1)  An ALF shall be a permitted or conditional use within the RMF, RMF-T, OMI, CG, CN, and CT zoning districts. 
(2)  An ALF providing services for six (6) or less clients is a permitted use within the AG, RE, RSF, RMF, and MHC zoning districts. 
(3)  An ALF providing services to seven (7) or more clients is permitted only by special exception within the AG, RE, RSF, and MHC zoning districts. 
(4)  Within the MHP district, an ALF may be permitted only by special exception. 
(5)  No ALF in a single-family residential zoning district, or generally located off major roadways within the established single-family neighborhood, shall be located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from an existing ALF in a single-family residential zone or established single-family neighborhood, as documented by the appropriate county department. The distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the existing ALF to the nearest point of the proposed ALF. An ALF which is in existence on the effective date of this section in a single-family residential zone, or generally located off major roadways within the established single-family neighborhood, which has been licensed by the state and which is presently located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another ALF, shall not be considered nonconforming. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  An ALF shall meet the development standards applicable to the zoning district in which they are located, and it shall meet all applicable "special regulations" set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(2)  For an ALF in a residential zoning district, no external evidence of such use, distinguishing the ALF from a regular dwelling, shall be visible from adjacent properties, public or private, except a sign with a maximum area of four (4) square feet within a single-family zoning district, or a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet within a multi-family zoning district. 
(3)  The requirements and standards of the appropriate state department shall be met and evidence of current appropriate state licenses must be shown. 
(4)  Compliance with the terms of this section and documentation issued hereunder with regard to zoning compliance are not a substitute for or exemption from the requirements of county occupational licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-004, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15; Ord. No. 2015-056, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15) 
Cross reference— Definition of assisted living facility, § 3-9-2. 
Sec. 3-9-63. - Airport protection and land use compatibility overlay code. 
(a)  Establishment and title. The Airport Protection and Land Use Compatibility Overlay Code for Charlotte County is hereby established. The short title of this section shall be the "airport overlay code". 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable airport zoning regulations to implement the provisions of state and federal law relating to land uses and height of structures near airports; to provide for airspace protection and land use compatibility with airport operations; to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the vicinity of an airport by minimizing the exposure to hazards and noise levels generated by aircraft operations; to facilitate proper land use planning and to prohibit the location of incompatible land uses and structures in areas surrounding existing or future airports; to provide a process to issue or deny permits and enforcement thereof for airport obstructions or hazards; to provide for coordination and notification of airport protection permitting between municipalities and the county; and to provide for coordination of permit applications between the county and state. 
(c)  Applicability. The airport overlay code shall apply to development and redevelopment of all land uses within ten (10) nautical miles from the airport reference point and all other matters referenced in this airport overlay code. The terms development and redevelopment shall be construed liberally and shall include any plat, special exception, variance, development review committee approval, site plan approval, building or sign permit, or any other official action of Charlotte County that has the effect of permitting development and redevelopment or any application for any of the preceding. The airport overlay code shall apply to the preceding matters notwithstanding the application of another provision(s) of the County Code to said matter(s). In the event of a conflict between another provision of County Code and the airport overlay code, the terms of the more restrictive regulations shall govern and prevail. 
(d)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in this section. 
Aeronautical Study: A Federal Aviation Administration study, conducted in accordance with the standards of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations part 77 and Federal Aviation Administration policy and guidance, on the effect of proposed construction or alteration upon the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. 
Airport: Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the takeoff and landing of aircraft and used or to be used in the interest of the public for such purpose. 
Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level. The airport elevation at the Punta Gorda Airport is twenty-six (26) feet. 
Airport hazard area: Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established. 
Airport hazard: Any structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which would exceed the federal obstruction height standards as contained in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Chapter One, Subchapter E, Part 77 and which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in takeoff, maneuvering, or landing at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such taking off, maneuvering, or landing of aircraft. 
Airport layout plan: A set of scaled drawings that provide a graphic representation of the existing and future development plan for the airport and demonstrate the preservation and continuity of safety, utility, and efficiency of the airport. 
Airport notification area for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA): All lands within six (6) statute miles of the airport reference point for public-use airports. 
Airport notification area for the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT): All lands within ten (10) nautical miles of the airport reference point for public-use airport. 
Airport notification area for the heliports: All lands within one (1) statute miles of the airport reference point for heliports. 
Airport operational area: The area that includes all areas designated and used for landing, taking off, or surface maneuvering of aircraft. The area includes ramps, aprons, runways and taxiways. 
Avigation easement: The assignment of a right to an airport proprietor to a portion of the total benefits of the ownership of real property. The selected rights may be granted to the airport proprietor or may be purchased by him. 
Day-Night Sound Levels (DNL): A day-night twenty-four-hour average sound level measurement, expressed in decibels, obtained after addition of ten (10) decibels to sound levels during the nighttime period from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Heliport: A landing facility to be used by helicopters only 
Nautical mile: A nautical mile is equal to six thousand seventy-six (6,076) feet. 
Noise reduction (NR): Reduction in decibels of sound pressure levels between two (2) designated locations or rooms for a stated frequency or band. 
Nonconforming use: For purposes of airport protection and land use compatibility regulations in this section, any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of lands, which is inconsistent with these provisions. 
Non-precision instrument runway: A runway having a non-precision instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military services' military airport planning document. 
Precision instrument runway: A runway having an instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA-approved airport layout plan; a military services' approved military airport layout plan; any other FAA planning document, or military services' military airport planning document. 
Private-use airport: A privately-owned airport not open to the public or operated for public benefit. 
Public-use airport: An airport, licensed by the state, which is open to public use without prior permission. It may or may not be publicly owned. The Punta Gorda Airport, also referred to as "PGD", operated by the Charlotte County Airport Authority is a public-use airport. 
Qualified acoustical consultant: A person who, because of his training and experience in the science and technology of acoustics and his knowledge of construction methods and materials, is considered qualified to pass judgment on acoustical designs, materials and methods of construction for the attenuation of noise. 
Runway: A defined rectangular area on an airport prepared or suitable for the landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
Runway protection zone: An area at ground level beyond the runway end to enhance the safety and protection of people and property on the ground. 
Sound level reduction (SLR): Different in decibels between the sound level outside a building and the sound level inside a designated room of the building which is caused by exterior noise. 
Site-specific analysis (SSA): The process by which a proposed land use in a designated aircraft noise-impacted area is examined for compliance with the county land use plan, and the noise zone map or land use guidance chart contained herein. Site-specific analysis enables the permit or plot applicant to be advised of the type of construction needed to meet the sound level reduction requirements. 
Statute mile: A statute mile is equal to five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) feet. 
Structure: Any object, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to: buildings, towers, smoke stacks, utility poles and overhead transmission lines. 
Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures and without an existing straight-in instrument approach. 
(e)  Permitting, administration and enforcement. 
(1)  Administration and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the zoning official to administer and enforce the requirements prescribed herein within the territorial limits over which Charlotte County has jurisdiction through the permitting process. 
(2)  Permit required. Any person proposing to construct, alter, or allow an obstruction in an airport hazard area, as determined by the FAA, must apply for a building or development permit, as applicable. Such permit may not be issued if it would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or if it would permit a nonconforming obstruction to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was when the applicable airport protection zoning regulation was adopted which allowed the establishment or creation of the obstruction, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
(3)  Permit application. In addition to the standard submittal documents associated with a building or development permit application, permit applications under this section shall include documentation showing compliance with the federal requirement for notification of proposed construction or alteration of structures and a valid aeronautical study. All such applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate review fee established by resolution. 
(4)  Review criteria. The following criteria shall be considered when determining whether to issue or deny a permit: 
a.  The safety of persons on the ground and in the air. 
b.  The safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. 
c.  The nature of the terrain and height of existing structures. 
d.  The effect of the construction or alteration on the state licensing standards for a public-use airport contained in F.S. ch. 330, and rules adopted thereunder. 
e.  The character of existing and planned flight operations and developments at public-use airports. 
f.  Federal airways, visual flight rules, flyways and corridors, and instrument approaches as designed by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
g.  The effect of the construction or alteration of an obstruction on the minimum descent altitude or the decision height at the affected airport. 
h.  The cumulative effects on navigable airspace of all existing structures and all other known proposed structures in the area. 
i.  Additional requirements adopted by Charlotte County or the Charlotte County Airport Authority pertinent to evaluation and protection of airspace and airport operations. 
j.  Comments provided by other affected municipal jurisdictions, if any. 
(5)  Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) Review. Upon receipt of a complete permit application, a copy of the application shall be provided to the Florida Department of Transportation Aviation Office by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by a delivery service that provides a receipt evidencing delivery. Pursuant to F.S. § 333.025(5), the Department of Transportation shall have thirty (30) days to review the application and provide comments, if any, to the county, said time running concurrently with the review of the application by the county. 
(6)  Nonconforming uses. This section may not require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any obstruction not conforming to the regulation when adopted or amended, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as provided in subsection (e)(1) above. 
a.  Application to existing buildings. 
1.  General buildings or structures to which additions, alterations, or repairs are made shall comply with all the requirements of this part except as specifically provided in this subsection. 
2.  When additions, alterations or repairs within any three-year period exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of an existing building or structure, such buildings or structures shall be made to conform to the requirements of this part. 
3.  Alterations or repairs, not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the value of an existing building or structure may be made with the same materials of which the building or structure is constructed. 
4.  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the roof covering of any building shall be replaced in any three-year period unless the next roof covering is made to reduce noise from aircraft overflights to less than sixty-five (65) decibels measured inside the building. 
5.  Buildings in existence at the time of the passage of these regulations may have their existing use or occupancy continued if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of passage of these regulations, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life. 
b.  Application to moved buildings. Buildings or structures moved into an identified noise zone shall comply with applicable provisions of this section. 
(7)  Hazard marking and lighting. Notwithstanding other provisions on lighting in this section, the owner of any structure over two hundred (200) feet above ground level or an airport hazard shall install, operate, and maintain, at his or her own expense, marking and lighting on such structure in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70/7460-1K and subsequent amendments. 
(8)  Abandonment. A nonconforming obstruction that has been abandoned or is more than fifty (50) percent torn down, destroyed, deteriorated, or decayed shall not be granted a permit if it would allow the obstruction to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the airport protection zoning regulations. Whether or not an application is made for a permit under this subsection, the owner of the nonconforming obstruction may be required, at his own expense, to lower, remove, reconstruct, alter, or equip such obstruction as may be necessary to conform to the current airport protection zoning regulations. If the owner of the nonconforming obstruction neglects or refuses to comply with such requirement for thirty (30) days after notice, the county may proceed to have the obstruction lowered, removed, reconstructed, altered, or equipped, and assess the cost and expense thereof upon the owner of the obstruction or the land whereon it is, or was, located. 
(9)  Appeals. Any person desiring to appeal a decision or determination made by the zoning official in accordance with this section may apply to the board of zoning appeals for an appeal of the decision or determination according to the provisions of section 3-9-6. 
(10)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structures, or use his property not in accordance with this chapter, may apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from the requirements of this section according to the provisions of section 3-9-6. No application for a variance to the requirements of this section may be considered by the board of zoning appeals unless a copy of the application, along with a site-specific analysis, has been furnished to the appropriate airport manager at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the board of zoning appeals meeting date. In granting any variance, the board of zoning appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions, requirements and safeguards in conformity with these regulations and the intent hereof including avigation easements or sound level reduction techniques, if deemed necessary. 
(11)  Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, the following activities and structures shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this section. 
a.  Existing structures that received construction permits from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that exceed federal obstruction standards before May 20, 1975. A permit is not required for any necessary replacement or repairs to such existing structures if the height and location are unchanged. 
b.  Non-substantial improvements of existing residential structures and parcels, and non-residential structures or parcels provided the principal use of the property has not been discontinued for a period of no less than one (1) year. 
c.  Cranes, construction equipment, and other temporary structures in use or in place for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) consecutive months are exempt from review by the Florida Department of Transportation, unless request by FDOT. 
(12)  Transmittal. Political subdivisions shall provide a copy of all airport protection zoning regulations and airport land use compatibility zoning regulations, and any related amendments, to the FDOT's aviation office within thirty (30) days after adoption. 
(f)  Airport Protection Overlay Zones. To carry out the provisions of this section, there are hereby created and established certain "protected zones" that include lands, in the unincorporated portions of Charlotte County and portions of the City of Punta Gorda, lying beneath the primary, approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones or imaginary surfaces as they apply to a public-use airport. The boundaries of the airport protection overlay zones shall apply to all zoning classifications established in chapter 3-9. An area located in more than one (1) of the airport protection overlay zones is considered to be in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The airport protection overlay zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Primary zone: A rectangular area longitudinally centered on a runway, extending two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway with the width as specified below for each runway for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of the runway. No structure or obstruction shall be permitted within the primary zone that is not part of the landing and take-off area, and is of a greater height than the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary zone of a runway is as follows: 
a.  For precision instrument runways .....1,000 feet. 
b.  For non-precision instrument runways .....500 feet. 
c.  For public utility, visual runways .....250 feet. 
d.  For private utility, visual runways .....100 feet. 
(2)  Runway protection zone: A trapezoidal area at ground level beginning at the end of the primary zone, two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of a runway, and centered about the extended runway centerline, with the shortest side of the trapezoid matching the width of the primary zone. The runway protection zone dimension for a particular runway end is a function of the type of aircraft associated with that runway end. Its width corresponds to that approach zone. Its length varies as follows: 
a.  For precision instrument runways .....2,500 feet. 
b.  For non-precision instrument runways .....1,500 feet. 
c.  For public utility, visual runways .....1,000 feet. 
(3)  Horizontal zone: The area around a runway with an outer boundary, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary zone of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. The radius of each arc for the horizontal surface is five thousand (5,000) feet for visual approach runways, and ten thousand (10,000) feet for all other approach types. The horizontal zone extends outward from the transitional zone to the edge of the conical zone. No structure or obstruction can extend one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation. 
(4)  Conical zone: The area extending outward from the periphery of the horizontal zone for a distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. Height limitations for structures in the conical zone are one hundred fifty (150) feet above airport height at the inner boundary with permitted height increasing one (1) foot vertically for every twenty (20) feet of horizontal distance measured outward from the inner boundary to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above airport height at the outer boundary. 
(5)  Approach zone: An area longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of a runway's primary zone. An approach zone is determined for each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end. Permitted height limitations within the approach zones is the same as the runway end height at the inner edge and increases with horizontal distance outward from the inner edge as follows: 
a.  Precision instrument runway: Permitted height increases one (1) foot vertically for every fifty (50) feet horizontal distance for the first ten thousand (10,000) feet (two hundred (200) feet vertically) and then increases one (1) foot vertically for every forty (40) feet horizontal distance for an additional forty thousand (40,000) feet (one thousand (1,000) feet vertically). The maximum outer width is sixteen thousand (16,000) feet. 
b.  Non-precision instrument runways: Permitted height increases one (1) foot vertically for every thirty-four (34) feet horizontal distance for a total distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet. The maximum outer width is three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet. 
c.  Visual runways: Permitted height increases one (1) foot vertically for every twenty (20) feet horizontal distance for a total distance of five thousand (5,000) feet (two hundred fifty (250) feet vertically). The maximum outer width is one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet. 
(6)  Transitional zone: The area extending outward and upward at a 7:1 slope from the sides of the primary zones and approach zones connecting them to the horizontal zone. Height limits within the transitional zone are the same as the primary zones or approach zones at the boundary line where it adjoins and increases at a rate of one (1) foot vertically for every seven (7) feet horizontally, with the horizontal distance measured at right angles to the runway centerline and extended centerline, until the height matches the height of the horizontal zone or conical zone or for a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the side of the part of the precision approach zone that extends beyond the conical zone. 
(g)  Airport land use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no use may be made of land or water within any zones established by this section in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of an airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to any proposed use: 
(1)  Prohibited uses in runway protection zone. Notwithstanding the uses permitted in the underlying zoning classifications as provided in chapter 3-9, the following uses are prohibited within any runway protection zone. 
a.  Assisted living facilities. 
b.  Group homes. 
c.  Hospitals. 
d.  Multifamily standard or manufactured modular dwellings. 
e.  Schools, public, parochial or private. 
f.  Storage of explosive material. 
g.  Uses that assemble large groups of people or any other use that could produce a major catastrophe as a result of an aircraft crash. 
(2)  Restricted areas for residential development and educational facilities. New residential development and educational facilities, as defined in F.S. § 333.01, as amended, shall be prohibited within an area contiguous to an airport runway measuring one-half (½) the length of the longest runway on either side of and at the end of each runway centerline. 
(3)  Additional restricted areas for educational facilities. New educational facilities, as defined in F.S. § 333.01, as amended, shall be prohibited within a rectangular area having a width of one-half (½) of the runway length and a length of five (5) statute miles. Said rectangular area shall be centered on the runway centerline as extended and begin at the physical end of the runway pavement. 
(4)  Lighting. All lights or illumination used in conjunction with streets, parking, signs or uses of land or structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner that they are not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from a public airport or in the vicinity thereof, by shielding, directing downwards, or other means as necessary. 
(5)  Visibility and glare. No operations from any type of land use shall produce smoke, glare or other visual hazards that endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(6)  Electrical interference. No operations of any type shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft. 
(7)  Wildlife hazard attractants. Landfills, waste disposal facilities, and other facilities that store, handle, or process organic or any other material that foster or harbor the growth of insects, rodents, amphibians, or other organisms that result in significant bird population increases above the normal background level, as well as storm-water management facilities, wetlands, and other areas containing aquatic life and vegetation also attract birds and other wildlife that may increase the potential for aircraft bird strikes, resulting in damage to aircraft and injury to occupants shall be subject to the following regulations. 
a.  New landfills shall not be located: 
1.  Within ten thousand (10,000) feet of the nearest point of any runway used or planned to be used by turbine aircraft; or 
2.  Within five thousand (5,000) feet of the nearest point of any runway used or planned to be used by only non-turbine aircraft. 
3.  Outside the perimeters described in subsections 1 and 2 above, but within the lateral limits of the civil airport imaginary surfaces as defined by federal regulations, as amended from time to time, for approaching, departing, and circling aircraft. 
b.  All proposed and existing landfills shall be reviewed to determine whether they attract or sustain hazardous bird movements from feeding, water, or roosting areas into or across the runways or approach and departure patterns of aircraft. The existence of such hazards shall be considered in deciding whether to permit a proposed landfill, and whether to require an existing or proposed landfill to use bird management techniques or other practices to minimize bird hazards to airborne aircraft. 
c.  Above-ground storm-water management facilities, including open water features, canals, marsh areas, dry detention, and littoral zone areas should not be placed within airport operations areas due to their aquatic and vegetative environments and potential to attract wildlife. Where such facilities are unavoidable, best management practices shall be used to decrease the potential to attract wildlife, such as steep slopes, rip-rap lined detention areas, vegetation management, and use of dry detention areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-030, § 1(Exh. A), 6-13-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-030, § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 13, 2017, amended § 3-9-63 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-9-63 pertained to airport zones, airspace height limitations and noise zones and derived from minutes of Dec. 2, 1981, § 8; Res. No. 85-312, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 1985; Res. No. 89-27, § 1, adopted May 8, 1989; and Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014. 
Sec. 3-9-64. - Alcoholic beverages. 
No bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub or tavern shall be located less than one thousand (1,000) feet from an established school, which distance shall be measured on a straight line connecting the closest point of the structure of such bar, nightclub, cocktail lounge or tavern to the closest point of the structure of such school unless a special exception is approved by the board of zoning appeals. If a school shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any established bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub or tavern, such established use or structure (bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub or tavern) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use or structure. For the purpose of this section, "school" shall mean a public or private facility devoted to primary, secondary or advanced education. The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in conjunction with a private club shall be considered to be an accessory use provided that such sale and consumption be restricted from public access or use. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Res. No. 87-258, § 4, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 89-47, § 4, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 92-38, § 1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-005, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 1-3. 
Sec. 3-9-65. - Boating structures. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, boating structures shall include all boat docks, boat ramps, boat lifts, marine elevators, pilings, boat shelters or other structures as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. Where non-commercial boat docks are constructed as the principal use on a vacant property, fences, walls and boat lifts shall be permitted as accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  No boating structures shall be constructed without the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  No boating structures shall be permitted in the waters of the Gulf of Mexico. 
(4)  Boating structures are required to meet the minimum side yard requirement set forth in the zoning district in which the property is located except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
(5)  At the end of canals boating structures must remain within an area determined by extending a line from each corner of the canal on a forty-five-degree angle to the mid point of the canal. Where two (2) properties share a property line at the end of a canal the property line will extend in to the canal to establish division between the properties. 
(a)  Boating structures at the end of canals with less than seventy-five (75) feet of water frontage must maintain a ten-percent side setback as determined by the portion of the property that abuts the water. 
(6)  Unwalled roofed areas are permitted on boating structures provided the overhang extends no more than two (2) feet seaward of the permitted dock or boat lift. 
(7)  All mooring pilings, docks, lifts and exposed boat lift cradles located in a canal more than fifteen (15) feet seaward of the seawall or mean high waterline shall be marked with white or yellow reflectors, and the top three (3) feet shall be painted white. Docks extending more than fifteen (15) feet seaward of the seawall or mean high water line shall be required to mark only the two (2) outermost pilings with reflectors. 
(8)  No boating structures shall fall within a state sovereign submerged land easement granted to the county unless approved by the county. 
(9)  No boating structures shall impede safe navigation nor shall any such structures extend into the navigable channel. 
(10)  This section, except that portion requiring a building permit, shall not apply to structures within a three-sided basin, provided, however, that all three (3) sides of the basin and the underlying basin bottom land are under unitary ownership and control. 
(11)  If the requirements of this section cannot be met, an application for a special exception may be filed in accordance with the procedures of section 3-9-6.2, special exceptions. 
(b)  Boating structures on waterbodies. 
(1)  In natural bodies of water, including those which have been altered or dredged, on boating structures shall be erected nearer to the centerline of an open water span or edge of marked channel than fifteen (15) feet, nor shall any structures extend from the mean high waterline more than twenty-five (25) percent of the open water span at the point of installation, or less than fifteen (15) feet from the centerline of the open water span or edge of marked channel, whichever is less. The edge of the marked channel shall be considered the straight line drawn between successive channel markers. 
(2)  On manmade bodies of water, such structures shall not extend further seaward than twenty-five (25) percent of the open water span or twenty-five (25) feet from the mean high waterline or seawall at the point of installation, whichever is less. 
(3)  Signs prohibiting mooring shall be posted on the seaward end of any boat structure that extends the maximum length into a waterbody as permitted in this section. 
(4)  The open water span shall be measured from seawall to seawall or mean high waterline to mean high waterline at point of installation. County staff will verify the open water span of a water body at the applicant's request with a review fee. 
(5)  Boating structures shall be designed to prevent or minimize impacts to grass beds and other biologically productive bottom habitats. Where a boating structure is in conflict with subsections (b)(1) or (2) of this article, an extended length may be permitted where necessary to prevent impacts to grass beds and other biologically sensitive bottom habitats. A benthic survey prepared by an environmental professional may be required by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(6)  The length of boating structures shall be sufficient to provide for a minimum water depth of minus four (4) feet mean low water. Where a boating structure is in conflict with subsections (b)(1) or (2) of this article, an extended length may be permitted where necessary to obtain minus four (4) feet mean low water. A bathymetric survey verifying sufficient depth shall be required from a licensed professional. 
(7)  A water depth of less than minus four (4) feet mean low water may be permitted if it can be demonstrated that the lesser depth will not result in boat impacts to sensitive bottom communities. 
(c)  Boat ramps. 
(1)  In the event separate access is created for a boat ramp from a public right-of-way, a permitted driveway apron must be built in accordance with the requirements of the Charlotte County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Seawall removal in conjunction with boat ramp construction must be done in accordance with the requirements of the Charlotte County Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Boat ramps are required to meet a minimum side yard setback of six (6) feet in all zoning districts. 
(4)  Boat ramps in residential zoning districts shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-026, § 1(Exh. A), 5-26-15) 
Cross reference— Boats, docks and waterways, Ch. 3-1; Ch. 3-1, Art. XV, surface water and wetland protection; § 3-5-348, standards. 
Sec. 3-9-65.1. - Boats used for living purposes; houseboats. 
(a)  Generally. Living aboard boats and houseboats is prohibited in any district except within a marina as an accessory use approved by site plan review process in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Procedure. All applications for approval of such accessory use must meet the following standards: 
(1)  Water supply. An adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in compliance with all applicable governmental regulations. Whenever a municipal or public water supply is available to the marina, such water supply shall be used. At least one (1) service connection shall be provided for each boat slip consisting of at least a water hydrant and the necessary appurtenances to protect it against backflow and siphonage. 
(2)  Toilet facilities. In addition to those required for employees, not less than the following toilet and bathing facilities contained in central units for men and women shall be provided: For women: one (1) toilet for each fifteen (15) boat slips or fraction thereof, one (1) lavatory for each twenty (20) boat slips or fraction thereof and one (1) shower bath for each twenty (20) boat slips or fraction thereof. For men: one (1) toilet for each twenty (20) boat slips or fraction thereof, one (1) urinal for each twenty-five (25) boat slips or fraction thereof, one (1) lavatory for each twenty (20) boat slips or fraction thereof and one (1) shower bath for each twenty (20) boat slips or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Sewage disposal. An adequate and safe method of sewage collection, treatment and disposal shall be provided in compliance with all applicable governmental regulations. Whenever a municipal or public sewer system is available to the marina, such system shall be used. Equipment shall be provided for the pumping of sewage holding tanks and for the disposal of the effluent therefrom. No sewage shall be discharged at any time into the water. 
(4)  Garbage and refuse disposal. Storage, collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be so managed as to prevent the creation of nuisances, odors, rodent or insect breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution. All garbage shall be stored in tightly covered impervious containers provided in sufficient number to prevent garbage from overflowing. Refuse shall be stored, transported and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of all applicable governmental regulations. 
(5)  Office and manager. Live-aboard marinas shall be supervised by a manager. Each marina shall provide office space for the use of the manager. 
(6)  Registration of patrons. All persons living aboard boats shall register immediately upon docking. Registration records shall contain the name, mailing address and street address of the boat owner or operator, and the name, if any, and registration number of the boat. Such records shall be preserved and available on request of the zoning official, property appraiser, law enforcement officers or other public officers. 
(7)  Rules and regulations to be posted and enforced. Each marina owner or operator shall enforce and post rules providing at least the following: 
a.  Occupant responsibility. Each occupant of the marina shall be required to use the sanitary facilities or sewer disposal facilities furnished by the marina. 
b.  Condition of boats. All live-aboard boats except those docked for emergency repairs must be capable of getting under way under their own power within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  Conflict. If these standards conflict with any state or federal regulation, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Res. No. 84-180, § 1, 9-18-84; Res. No. 86-86, § 1, 4-22-86; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-027, § 1(Exh. A), 5-26-15) 
Cross reference— Boats, docks and waterways, Ch. 3-1. 
Sec. 3-9-66. - Bridgeless barrier islands. 
This section provides for a maximum residential density on those barrier islands having no access by road from the mainland. 
(a)  All parcels one (1) acre or greater in size (as of October 22, 1990) shall be limited to a density of one (1) unit per gross acre, except where vested rights relating to allowable densities are determined to exist under the vested rights provisions of chapter 3-10 of this Code. It is not the intent of this provision to exempt these areas from any applicable concurrency requirements. 
(b)  All legally created parcels (as of October 22, 1990) less than one (1) acre in size shall have an allowable density of one (1) unit per parcel, except where vested rights relating to allowable densities are determined to exist under the vested rights provisions of chapter 3-10 of this Code. It is not the intent of this provision to exempt these areas from any applicable concurrency requirements. 
(Ord. No. 91-05, § 3, 2-26-91; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-006, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15) 
Sec. 3-9-67. - Cluster housing. 
(a)  Generally. In certain districts, cluster housing is permitted. In such developments, a lot size smaller than normally required is permitted so long as density does not exceed the maximum density permitted in such district. 
(b)  Procedure for development. Land to be used for cluster housing shall be developed in accordance with an approved development plan. 
(c)  Ownership and encumbrance. A certificate of apparent ownership and encumbrance or other evidence acceptable to the zoning official, which evidence shows that the developer has unified control of the development, shall be submitted prior to development plan approval. 
(d)  Development standards. The development standards of the applicable district shall apply except that there shall be no interior yard setback or minimum lot area or width requirements. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-68. - Communication towers. 
(a)  Exempt telecommunication facilities. 
(1)  The following telecommunication facilities are exempt from the provisions of this section, provided they do not exceed fifty (50) feet in height or the maximum height allowed by the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Noncommercial freestanding or structure-mounted "receive only" antennas three (3) meters or less in diameter that receive direct broadcast services. 
(3)  Amateur radio antennas and towers. 
(4)  An antenna or tower used as an accessory use to emergency services. 
(5)  Temporary towers associated with a special event may be permitted for a limited period of time by the county as part of the event. 
(6)  Temporary towers necessary to aid in post-disaster relief efforts. 
(b)  Co-location requirements. 
(1)  All proposed telecommunication facilities shall co-locate with existing facilities wherever possible or the applicant must demonstrate that no existing telecommunication facility or alternate support structure within the applicant's geographic search area is reasonably available to support the applicant's facility. The applicant must demonstrate that the existing facilities or alternate support structures located within the geographic area meet one (1) of the following criteria: 
a.  They are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  They do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
c.  They do not have sufficient space to allow the applicant's antenna and related equipment to function effectively and reasonably in parity with other similar equipment. 
d.  They are unavailable for lease under a reasonable leasing agreement. 
e.  They would result in electromagnetic interference with or by the antenna. 
f.  They have other limiting factors, including adverse economic reasons, that render an existing facility or alternate support structure unsuitable. Costs over the life of the applicable lease in excess of the cost of permitting and constructing a new facility shall be presumed to create an adverse economic reason. 
(2)  Co-locating on an existing tower or alternate support structure which must be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location shall be considered a permitted use and may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed forty (40) feet over the tower's existing height provided it does not exceed the federal obstruction standards set forth in 14 CFR part 77. 
(3)  Alternate support structures to which an antenna may be attached include, but are not limited to, commercial, office, and industrial buildings, multifamily residential buildings, mixed use buildings, water tanks, utility and light poles, poles at publicly-owned facilities, athletic facilities, or other structures not originally designed as antenna mounts. 
(c)  Additional application requirements. In addition to the standard application requirements, the following information shall be submitted upon application for any telecommunication facility: 
(1)  Special exception application including all specified supporting documentation. 
(2)  Copies of letters to and all responses from other entities owning or using nonexempt communication towers, inquiring whether said entities have a need to co-locate antennas or have tower space available for co-location of antennas. All letters shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested. The county shall maintain a list of telecommunication service providers which shall be considered the minimum contact list. 
(3)  A statement from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) stating that the proposed tower meets all required setbacks from any nesting locations for birds listed as protected species in the FWC's Official Lists of Endangered and Potentially Endangered Fauna and Flora in Florida or its successor. 
(4)  For proposed facilities taller than two hundred (200) feet, a statement from the FAA stating that the proposed tower is determined not to be a hazard to air navigation. 
(5)  The applicant's geographic search area as set forth by engineering report and the existing towers or suitable alternate support structures within such geographic search area. If the applicant is not a service provider, the applicant must submit a letter from a service provider indicating their intent to use the tower. The geographic search area and other relevant data will be based, at minimum, on the service provider's need. 
(6)  The type of tower or supporting structure. 
(7)  The height of the tower including antennas above ground and above MSL. 
(d)  Conditions of approval. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Telecommunication facilities shall not have any form of advertisement attached or otherwise affixed. 
b.  Telecommunication facilities shall not be illuminated except as required by federal, state, or local laws or regulations or as a condition attached to a special exception. 
c.  Development of a telecommunication facility site shall be subject to the habitat preservation provisions of this Code. 
d.  No telecommunication facility shall be constructed on any property containing a rare vegetation community including, but not limited to, forested wetlands, tropical hardwood hammock, sandhill, or xeric oak scrub if the construction or maintenance of the proposed facility would cause the destruction of any portion of the rare vegetation community. 
e.  The owner of any telecommunication facility must provide the county with the name, address, and telephone number of a contact person or persons to address or repair any problems with the tower. This information must be posted prominently at the facility and updated within thirty (30) days in the event of any changes. Failure to comply with the requirement to provide and post the contact person information shall be a violation of this section. 
f.  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the facility, signs displaying in large bold letters "HIGH VOLTAGE — DANGER" shall be located every twenty (20) feet and attached to the fence or wall. In the case of structure-mounted antennas, signs shall be placed within ten (10) feet of the antenna. 
g.  A fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height shall be provided around each facility located on the ground. Access to the facility shall be through a locked gate. Structure-mounted facilities shall be located and designed to be accessible to authorized personnel only. 
h.  Except where prohibited by a zoning overlay district or other provisions of this Code, structure-mounted antennas are permitted up to a height of twenty (20) feet above the existing height of the structure. The antenna shall be an unobtrusive color and where feasible the design elements of the building such as parapet walls, screen enclosures, or mechanical equipment shall screen it. 
i.  Any tower located in a residential zoning district shall be required to be a monopole. 
(2)  Setback requirements. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities shall meet the following setbacks: 
1.  Any new tower, equipment enclosures and ancillary structures shall be set back from all interior and rear lot lines a minimum of ten (10) feet and shall meet the minimum setback requirements for the zoning district where it is located for the front lot line, except that where the minimum setback distance for the tower from any residentially zoned property line, public right-of-way, emergency evacuation route, existing school, or existing residential dwelling unit, is less than the height of the proposed tower, the minimum setback distance shall be increased to the height of the proposed tower, unless the tower will be constructed using "breakpoint" design technology, in which case the minimum setback distance shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the distance from the top of the tower to the "breakpoint" level of the tower. For example, on a one hundred-foot tall monopole tower with a breakpoint at eighty (80) feet, the minimum setback distance would be twenty-two (22) feet (one hundred ten (110) percent of twenty (20) feet, the distance from the top of the tower to the "breakpoint). 
2.  Certification by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Florida of the "breakpoint" design and the design's fall radius must be provided together with the other information required herein by the applicant. 
b.  All towers shall comply with regulations for height restrictions in airport zones of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission and the Florida Department of Transportation, Division of Aeronautics, or a municipal or other airport authority qualified by law to establish airport hazard zoning regulations. 
c.  All towers shall be engineered so that in case of collapse, all parts of the structure will fall within the site. 
d.  Multiple towers on a site must be located at least as far from each other as the height of the taller tower. 
(e)  Replacement. 
(1)  Any replacement telecommunications tower seeking to increase the height of the existing tower shall be required to modify the existing special exception. 
(2)  Any replacement telecommunications tower without increase in height shall follow the existing special exception. 
(3)  Any replacement of the existing tower which did not receive a special exception approval shall be required to obtain a special exception. 
(4)  The replacement telecommunications tower shall be located on the same parcel or lot as the original tower. 
(5)  If the existing telecommunications facility is nonconforming, the applicant demonstrates that the proposed replacement tower will mitigate the nonconformity. This demonstration might be in the form of a change in design (for example from a lattice-style to a monopole style tower or a reduction in height) or in providing additional setbacks or buffers than those that apply to the existing tower. 
(6)  The existing telecommunications facility being replaced is removed within one hundred twenty (120) days after completion of construction of the replacement telecommunications facility. 
(7)  Upon administrative approval, the replacement telecommunications facility will be deemed a legally conforming use. 
(f)  Abandonment. If a telecommunication facility ceases to receive and transmit signals for a period of one (1) year, then the facility will be deemed to be abandoned. The owner/operator of the abandoned facility shall be given one hundred eighty (180) days after being provided with written notice of the determination of abandonment, to either reactivate or dismantle and remove the facility. If the facility is not removed or reactivated, the county may obtain authorization from a court of competent jurisdiction to remove the facility and necessary support equipment and, after removal, shall place a lien on the subject property for all direct and indirect costs incurred in the removal and disposal of the facility and support equipment plus court costs and attorney fees. Where the county determines that physical factors or the nonuse constitutes an unsafe condition under the building code, such building code provisions and process shall supersede any time elements set forth. 
(Ord. No. 2014-069, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-69. - Conditional uses and structures. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide rules and regulations for any uses and structures designated as a "conditional use and structure (C)" on the use table and listed in all zoning districts found in chapter 3-9. These conditions supplement, modify, or further explain rules and regulations found elsewhere in this chapter, and unless specifically stated to the contrary, apply to all zoning districts. 
Regulations over and above those imposed by other articles/sections of this chapter are necessary for certain uses which, because of their uniqueness or potential for substantial impact on surrounding land uses, warrant minimum standards that cannot be properly addressed in the development regulations set forth in specific districts. The purpose of this section is to set forth the detailed regulations, including but not limited to the bulk, layout, yard size, and lot area that apply to these uses. 
(b)  Agricultural uses. 
(1)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities (RE). 
a.  Official documentation showing proof of participation in 4H, FFA or similar programs must be submitted to the county. 
b.  The uses and activities must cease at the completion of the 4H, FFA or similar programs. 
(2)  Domestic animal breeding, boarding, and training (RE). 
a.  The property must be located in the rural service area. 
b.  Chickens shall be provided with a covered nesting box within an enclosed yard. Enclosures shall only be permitted in side and rear yards and shall be sufficiently screened from the street and neighboring properties. 
c.  All enclosures shall be kept sanitary and free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odor, and constructed and maintained so as to prevent rodents or other pests from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure and to protect from predators. 
(3)  Farm labor housing (AG, EM). 
a.  May consist of single-family detached, manufactured homes, or multifamily dwelling units, but shall not be platted or sold. 
b.  Must receive approval through site plan review. 
c.  The number of units shall not exceed the base density available on the agricultural operation the housing is intended to serve. The full extent of the agricultural operation shall be shown on the site plan review application. 
d.  Shall not occupy more than ten (10) acres. 
e.  All setbacks requirements must be double the minimum setback requirements. 
f.  A copy of an approved permit for migrant labor camp from Environmental Health Office at Charlotte County Health Department shall be provided as applicable. In addition, all rules and requirements set forth in F.S. §§ 381.008—381.00897, and Rule 64E-14 F.A.C., as may be amended, shall apply. 
(4)  Guest home (see section 3-9-69.g.7.(b)). 
(5)  Horse stable (RE). 
a.  All shelter structures shall be set back double the minimum setback requirements within that district. 
b.  Any manure stock piles shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from all lot lines. 
c.  The minimize size of the property shall be one (1) acre per horse. 
d.  The property must be located in the rural service area. 
(6)  Livestock breeding, training, boarding, and grazing (PKR). 
a.  The property must be located in the rural service area. 
(7)  Manufactured home (HUD), minimum requirement is Wind Zone 3. (AG, EM, ES). 
a.  The property must be located outside of the coastal high hazard areas. 
(c)  Commercial uses. 
(1)  Assisted living facilities (ALFs) (see section 3-9-69.g.1.). 
(2)  Animal hospital and boarding facility (OMI, CN). 
a.  Outdoor runs are prohibited. 
(3)  Building trades contractor's office (CG). 
a.  No more than ten (10) service vehicles shall be allowed to be parked on the subject site. 
b.  No heavy equipment shall be allowed on the site. 
c.  Storage yard shall not be allowed on the site. 
(4)  Farm equipment, supply (CG). 
a.  Any equipment over eight (8) feet in height must be either stored in a completely enclosed building or at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning. 
b.  Where items are stored outside in stacks or piles, the height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(5)  Laboratories, class 1, 2, 3 (CG, IG, II). 
a.  Provided central sewer is available. 
(6)  Marina (RMF-T, CG). 
a.  The property must have direct access to water. 
(7)  Private off-site parking (OMI, CG, CT, IG, II). 
a.  Required parking may be located on a separate, nonadjacent lot from the lot on which the principle use is located if the off-site parking complies with the following standards: 
1.  Shall not be located more than six hundred (600) feet from the entrance of the building with which it is associated. 
2.  Shall not be separated from the use served by an arterial road unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway or crosswalk is provided or other traffic control or remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
3.  An unobstructed route along sidewalks or pedestrian walkways shall be provided between the parking area and the associated site. 
4.  In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, the county shall require an agreement between all property owners, acceptable to the county attorney's office. An executed agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the applicant and recordation of the agreement must take place prior to issuance of development approval. 
5.  Shall not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or equipment. 
(8)  Vehicle sales, service and rental (CG). 
a.  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle sales and rentals, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
1.  Outdoor parking of vehicles shall be screened by an opaque barrier when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
2.  No maintenance, cleaning, or detailing of vehicles may be performed within thirty (30) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
3.  No outdoor amplified sound systems if the property is immediately adjacent to residential uses or zoning. 
4.  Major repair such as engine work, body repair or major overhaul of vehicles shall be in a completely enclosed building. Such repair shall be incidental to the sales and rentals. 
b.  Boat, travel trailer and motor vehicle repair and services, including recreational vehicles and campers. 
1.  Outdoor parking of vehicles shall be screened by an opaque barrier when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
2.  No maintenance, cleaning, or detailing of vehicles may be performed within thirty (30) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
3.  No outdoor amplified sound systems if the property is immediately adjacent to residential uses or zoning. 
4.  Major repair such as engine work, body repair or major overhaul of vehicles shall be in a completely enclosed building. 
c.  Noncommercial vehicle rental. 
1.  Outdoor parking of vehicles shall be screened by an opaque barrier when adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
2.  No maintenance, cleaning, or detailing of vehicles may be performed within thirty (30) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
3.  No outdoor amplified sound systems if the property is immediately adjacent to residential uses or zoning. 
4.  Major repair such as engine work, body repair or major overhaul of vehicles shall be in a completely enclosed building. Such repair shall be incidental to the noncommercial vehicle rental. 
(d)  Debris and waste facilities. 
(1)  Mini transfer station (IG, II). 
a.  A twenty-five-foot setback is required from all lot lines. 
b.  A Type C buffer defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, is required along all lot lines, and an opaque wall or fence is required when the site is adjacent to any nonindustrial or nonagricultural zoning district. 
c.  The facility may be no larger than ten (10) acres. 
d.  Piles of material, either prior to or following processing, may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
e.  Volume reduction operation machinery may not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any of the following: 
1.  Residential use. 
2.  Residential zoning district. 
3.  School. 
4.  Park. 
5.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
f.  Any volume reduction operation machinery within three hundred (300) feet of any of the following shall be enclosed in a structure with at least three (3) sides and a roof, and with the open end facing away from the listed use: 
1.  Right-of-way. 
2.  Residential use. 
3.  Residential zoning district. 
4.  School. 
5.  Park. 
6.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
(2)  Recovered materials processing facility (IG, II). 
a.  A twenty-five-foot setback is required from all lot lines. 
b.  A Type C buffer defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, is required along all lot lines and an opaque wall or fence is required when the site is adjacent to any nonindustrial or nonagricultural zoning district. 
c.  Piles of material, either prior to or following processing, may not exceed 15 feet in height. 
d.  Volume reduction operation machinery may not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any of the following: 
1.  Residential use. 
2.  Residential zoning district. 
3.  School. 
4.  Park. 
5.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
e.  Any volume reduction operation machinery within three hundred (300) feet of any of the following shall be enclosed in a structure with at least three (3) sides and a roof, and with the open end facing away from the listed use: 
1.  Right-of-way. 
2.  Residential use. 
3.  Residential zoning district. 
4.  School. 
5.  Park. 
6.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
(3)  Residential household hazardous waste collection center (IG, II). 
a.  A twenty-five-foot setback is required from all lot lines. 
b.  A Type C buffer defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, is required when the site is adjacent to any nonindustrial or nonagricultural zoning district. 
c.  The facility may be no larger than twenty (20) acres. 
d.  Volume reduction operation machinery may not be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any of the following: 
1.  Residential use. 
2.  Residential zoning district. 
3.  School. 
4.  Park. 
5.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
e.  Any volume reduction operation machinery within three hundred (300) feet of any of the following shall be enclosed in a structure with at least three (3) sides and a roof, and with the open end facing away from the listed use: 
1.  Right-of-way. 
2.  Residential use. 
3.  Residential zoning district. 
4.  School. 
5.  Park. 
6.  Hospital or other health care facility. 
(4)  Waste tire collection center (IG, II). 
a.  A thirty-foot setback is required from all lot lines. 
b.  A Type D buffer as described in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, with an opaque wall or fence is required along all lot lines. 
c.  Poles of material may not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(e)  Industrial uses. 
(1)  Automobile wrecking and salvage yard (II). 
a.  No storage of items is permitted within required front setback. 
b.  The perimeter shall be buffered with: 
1.  A Type D buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting residential zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
2.  A Type C buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting commercial zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
3.  A Type B buffer defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting IG or II zoning districts. 
c.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height over eight (8) feet shall be stored at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoned properties. 
(2)  Building trades contractor's office with storage yards on-premises (IG). 
a.  No storage of items is permitted within the required front setback. 
b.  Storage yards shall be buffered with: 
1.  A Type D buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting residential zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
2.  A Type C buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting commercial zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
3.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height over eight (8) feet shall be stored at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoned properties. 
(3)  Outdoor storage (IG, II). 
a.  No storage of items is permitted within required front setback. 
b.  The perimeter shall be buffered with: 
1.  A Type D buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting residential zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
2.  A Type C buffer as defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting commercial zoning districts regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. 
3.  A Type B buffer defined in chapter 3-5, article XVIII, landscaping and buffers, on interior lot lines abutting IG or II zoning districts. 
c.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
d.  Where items are stored in stacks or piles, the height over eight (8) feet shall be stored at least fifty (50) feet from any residential zoned properties. 
(f)  Public and civic uses. 
(1)  Detox center and substance abuse center (OMI). 
a.  Must be one thousand (1,000) feet from another detox center and substance abuse center. 
b.  In a residential neighborhood, no external evidence of such use, distinguishing the living facility from a regular dwelling, shall be visible from adjacent properties, public or private, except a small sign with a maximum area of four (4) square feet. 
(2)  Transitional/halfway housing (RMF, OMI). 
a.  Must be one thousand (1,000) feet from another transitional/halfway housing facility. 
b.  In a residential neighborhood, no external evidence of such use, distinguishing the living facility from a regular dwelling, shall be visible from adjacent properties, public or private, except a small sign with a maximum area of four (4) square feet. 
(g)  Residential uses. 
(1)  4H, FFA and similar uses and activities (RSF, RMF, RMF-T, MHP, MHC). 
a.  Official documentation showing proof of participation in 4H, FFA or similar programs must be submitted to the county. 
b.  The uses and activities must cease at the completion of the 4H, FFA or similar programs. 
c.  Three (3) chickens (no roosters) shall be allowed. The pen shall not be located within ten (10) feet from the side and rear property lines and behind the leading edge of the living area of the residential structure. 
(2)  Assisted living facilities (ALFs) (RMF, RMF-T, OMI, CG, CN, CT). 
a.  See section 3-9-62, adult living facilities. 
b.  All applicable requirements set forth in Florida Statutes shall apply. 
c.  Within the coastal high hazard areas, such use shall have a direct access to a major thoroughfare, such as Placida Road, Gasparilla Road, S.R. 776, or U.S. 41. Additionally, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  The proposed building will be constructed to provide for either shuttering or shatterproof glass in all windows. 
2.  The facility will include an independent emergency power supply. 
3.  The facility will provide a written emergency management plan under State of Florida rules with the plan being submitted to and approved by the Charlotte County Emergency Management Director. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast (AG, ES, EM, RE, RSF, MHC, RMF, RMF-T). 
a.  Property owner shall reside on site. 
b.  No more than two (2) guest rooms shall be allowed. 
c.  Must have room for two (2) off-street parking spaces for the operator and one (1) space per guest room. 
d.  No more than one (1) nonilluminated sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, may be attached to the building on or next to the entrance. 
e.  No external evidence of such use distinguishing the living facility from a regular dwelling shall be visible from adjacent properties, public or private, except the aforementioned sign. 
f.  Shall register with the county as a minor home occupation. 
g.  Must obtain and keep an active business license from Charlotte County, also known as a "local business tax receipt". 
(4)  Boarding, rooming house (RMF, RMF-T). 
a.  Must be owner-occupied. 
(5)  Clubhouse (RE, RSF, RMF, RMF-T, MHP, MHC). 
a.  Must be under unified residential development. 
b.  Restaurants or banquet facility for residents of the development and their guests are permitted. Public restaurants or banquet facility shall be permitted only by a special exceptional approval. 
(6)  Cluster housing (RE, RSF). 
a.  Must be approved under the site plan review process. 
b.  Must meet the base density of the property. 
c.  The subdivision may contain a golf course and/or clubhouse. 
d.  See section 3-9-67, cluster housing. 
(7)  Conservation subdivision (AG, EM). 
a.  Follow PD process. 
(8)  Guest home. 
a.  The property is located in the RSF, MHC districts. 
1.  Provided the lot area shall be not less than twice the minimum lot area required for a single-family dwelling. 
2.  Must be under one (1) ownership. 
3.  Must comply with all development standards within the appropriate zoning district. 
4.  Must be built of the same materials and in the same color scheme as the principal dwelling. 
5.  Impact fee shall be assessed as a dwelling unit. 
b.  The property is located in the AG, EM, RE districts. 
1.  Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted for each single-family dwelling. If necessary, one (1) density unit shall be transferred onto the site, in accordance with the transfer of density units provisions of this Code. 
2.  Must be under one (1) ownership. 
3.  Must comply with all development standards within the appropriate zoning district. 
4.  Must be built of the same materials and in the same color scheme as the principal dwelling. 
5.  Impact fee shall be assessed as a dwelling unit. 
(9)  Horse stable (RE) (see section 3-9-69.b.(5)). 
(10)  Nursing home (RMF, RMF-T). 
a.  No external evidence of such use, distinguishing the living facility from a regular dwelling, shall be visible from adjacent properties, public or private. 
b.  All applicable requirements set forth in Florida Statutes shall apply. 
(11)  Recreational vehicle use (MHP). 
a.  No more than one-third (⅓) of the sites may be occupied by recreational vehicles. 
b.  The occupancy of recreational vehicles on any individual living site by any individual or group of individuals shall be strictly limited to one hundred eighty (180) days and no individual or group of individual may reestablish occupancy of any individual living site until at least thirty (30) days following their departure. The county reserves the right to inspect occupancy records of the park to ensure enforcement of this condition. 
(12)  Single-family and multifamily residential (CT, OMI, RMF-T). 
a.  Any property that was zoned CT or prior to October 7, 1997, shall have a residential density of fifteen (15) units per acre. Any property that was zoned OMI prior to October 7, 1997, shall have a residential density of ten (10) units per acre. Any property that was zoned RMF-T prior to October 7, 1997, shall have a residential density of six (6) units per acre. 
(13)  Subdivided lots with fifty-foot wide frontage and five thousand (5,000) square foot lot (RSF, MHC). 
a.  The property must be located inside the urban service area. 
b.  Must meet the base density of the property. 
(14)  Accessory chicken keeping (RSF). 
a.  This use must be accessory to a properly permitted residential use and structure. 
b.  No more than four (4) hens (Gallus Domesticus) on a lot no smaller than ten thousand (10,000) square feet (or any lot legally created prior to October 22, 1992), or six (6) hens on lots twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater, may be kept in the rear yard. 
c.  Roosters are prohibited. 
d.  The killing and dressing of chickens is prohibited. 
e.  The hens shall be provided with a covered enclosure (i.e. "hen house/coop") and must always be kept in the covered enclosure or within a fenced enclosure if outside for exercise. If the enclosure is not readily movable for a storm event, it must be properly permitted and secured. Hens must be secured within the henhouse/coop during non-daylight hours. All areas where the chickens are located, including the coop, must be shielded on all sides by a fully opaque, six-foot-high, fence or wall. The fully-opaque, six-foot high fence or wall may enclose all or a portion of the yard so long as the coop and any outdoor area is fully enclosed. 
f.  The space per hen in the henhouse/coop shall not be less than four (4) square feet per hen. 
g.  No covered enclosure or fenced enclosure shall be located in the front yard, nor shall the henhouse/coop be closer than the required accessory structure yard setbacks to any property line of an adjacent property. Odors from hens, hen manure, or other hen related substances shall not be detectable at the property boundaries. 
h.  All enclosures for the keeping of hens shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent rodents or other pests from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of, the enclosure. The henhouse/coop must contain a barrier or barriers to prevent entry of rodents, wild birds, and predators, including coyotes, bobcats, dogs and cats. Enclosures shall be kept in neat condition, including provision of clean, dry bedding materials and regular removal of waste materials. All manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed promptly. 
i.  All feed and other items associated with the keeping of hens that are likely to attract, or to become infested with, or infected by rodents or other pests shall be kept in a secure location, container, or otherwise protected to prevent rodents and other pests from gaining access to or coming into contact with them. 
j.  The sale of eggs or any other hen products generated in a residential single-family district must be sold in a zoning district which permits the retail sale of such items. 
k.  No animal that kills a hen will, for that reason alone, be considered a dangerous or aggressive animal. 
l.  Chickens that are no longer wanted by their owners shall not be taken to animal control, nor shall they be released. 
m.  The owners of the chicken(s) must register their location with the department responsible with enforcement of the land development regulations. 
n.  The owners of the chicken(s) and any person living in the household who will be responsible for caring for the chicken(s) must take the "Chickens In Your Backyard" course provided by the UF IFAS Extension Office. 
o.  County staff shall have the right to conduct an inspection to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(h)  Mixed-use districts. 
(1)  Automotive, boat, and travel trailer sales, service, repair. 
a.  Shall only be permitted in completely enclosed buildings. 
(2)  Building trades contractor's office. 
a.  No heavy machinery. 
b.  Outdoor storage prohibited. 
(3)  Commercial or leisure vehicle rental. 
a.  Shall only be permitted in completely enclosed buildings. 
b.  Includes scooters, e-scooters, bicycles, motorized bicycles, etc. 
(4)  Drug store, pharmacy, dispensary. 
a.  Drive-through windows may only be permitted through the special exception process. 
(5)  Live-work units. Live-work units may be allowed as a special exception use, provided it complies with all of the general conditions established as follows, as well as any conditions that may be added by the BZA. The following conditions must be met and complied with by all operators of any live-work unit. 
a.  Commercial activities shall be conducted only by a resident of the dwelling unit. 
b.  No more than fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit may be devoted to commercial use. 
c.  No more than one (1) non-illuminated sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, may be attached to the building. The sign must be on or next to the entrance. 
d.  There shall be no outdoor storage of materials used in connection with the commercial use. 
e.  Parking must be provided in accordance with the parking provisions of this Code. 
f.  Up to five (5) persons who do not reside in the dwelling unit may be employed by the commercial use, subject to the provision of appropriate parking spaces. 
g.  No portion of a live-work unit may be separately rented or sold as a commercial space for any person or persons not residing within the residential space, or as a residential unit for any person or persons not working within the commercial space. 
h.  Hours of operation shall generally be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Deliveries and pick-up shall generally be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
i.  Any operator of the business in a live-work unit must obtain and keep current for as long as the commercial use is in operation, a business tax receipt from the Charlotte County Tax Collector, also known as the "Local Business Tax Receipt." 
j.  The following uses shall be prohibited from being operated in a live-work unit: 
1.  Animal boarding facility. 
2.  Bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, tavern. 
3.  Drugstore, pharmacy. 
4.  Dry cleaner. 
5.  Equipment rental. 
6.  Laundromat. 
7.  Liquor, package store. 
8.  Passenger vehicle rental. 
9.  Printing. 
(6)  Microbrewery, micro-distillery, micro-winery. 
a.  All brewing, distilling, or winemaking equipment visible from the street (excluding alleys), adjacent residential uses, or adjacent residential zoning shall be screened using architectural features consistent with the principal structure or shall be displayed in a manner that showcases the equipment and function. 
b.  For loading, storage, and equipment areas facing a perimeter street, a perimeter landscape strip with parking lot screening, as established in section 3-9-100.2, as may be amended, shall be installed and maintained to screen those areas. In instances where redevelopment of a site may not require site plan review, a landscape plan showing the required buffer, signed and sealed by a Florida registered landscape architect, shall be submitted for approval. 
c.  No outdoor storage shall be allowed, including the use of portable storage units, cargo containers, and tractor trailers. Spent or used grain or fruit may be approved to be stored outdoors for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours if such storage complies with the following standards: 
1.  It shall be designated on the approved site plan. 
2.  It shall be prohibited within any required area (parking, open space, landscape buffers, etc.) or any setback adjacent to residential uses or residential zoning. 
3.  It shall be fully enclosed within a sealed container, secured and screened behind a solid, opaque fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height. 
d.  The requirements and standards of the appropriate state and federal department shall be met and evidence of current appropriate state and federal licenses must be shown. 
(Ord. No. 2014-070, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-019, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-057, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2020-041, § 1(Exh. C), 10-27-20; Ord. No. 2020-050, § 1(Exh. C), 12-8-20) 
Sec. 3-9-70. - Debris and waste facilities. 
(a)  Types of debris and waste facilities. Debris and waste facilities shall be divided into low impact and high impact waste facilities. Low impact waste facilities shall be considered conditional uses, and subject to the conditions established in the appropriate conditional use provisions of this Code. High impact waste facilities are considered to have significant impacts upon the health, safety, and welfare of the public and shall be considered special exception uses. 
(1)  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
a.  Backyard composting. 
b.  Composting or anaerobic digestion of wastes generated on a farm, as part of agronomic, horticultural or silvicultural operations, for use on the farm as part of these operations. 
c.  Open burning of land clearing debris as permitted by the State of Florida, provided all the material to be burned originates on-site and burning is on a temporary basis. 
d.  The use of nonputrescible solid waste material for grade improvement done in conjunction with a building permit. 
e.  The storage of nonputrescible fill material for future use. 
f.  The disposal of clean debris in an excavation. 
g.  The processing, management and disposal of solid wastes generated as a result of a major storm, tornado or other natural or manmade disaster when undertaken by, under the supervision of, or at the direction of a local, state or federal agency. 
h.  Facilities that have been identified in an overlay district that implements the U.S. 17 Corridor Planning Area, if such district contains siting and development standards for such facilities. 
(2)  Low impact waste facilities. 
a.  Mini transfer station. 
b.  Minor yard trash processing facility. 
c.  Recovered materials processing facility. 
d.  Waste tire collection center. 
e.  Minor compost facility — Lot clearing debris only. 
(3)  High impact waste facilities. 
a.  Auto salvage yard. 
b.  Composting facility. 
c.  Materials recovery facility. 
d.  Soil treatment facility. 
e.  Solid waste combustor. 
f.  Solid waste disposal facility. 
g.  Transfer station. 
h.  Used oil processing facility. 
i.  Waste tire processing facility. 
j.  Waste tire site. 
(b)  Additional application requirements. 
(1)  General. In addition to the standard application requirements, the following information shall be submitted upon application for any debris and waste facility (copies of information submitted to other regulatory agencies will satisfy the following requirements where applicable): 
a.  Type of facility proposed. 
b.  An operation plan appropriate for the type of facility proposed, including the following information in narrative form: 
1.  Anticipated type and source of material, as well as limitations on types and source of material. 
2.  Volume of material to be received, expressed in cubic yards per day or tons per day. 
3.  Time limitations related to storage of material. 
4.  Method of operation of the facility. 
5.  Planned active life of the facility, the final design height of the facility, and the maximum height of the facility during its operation. 
6.  Source and type of cover material. 
7.  Methods of controlling odor, dust, litter, and vectors. 
8.  Method of management of byproducts from waste processing. 
9.  Emissions controls, including gas, leachate, and surface run-off. 
10.  Hours of operation. 
11.  Operating parameters and test results of identical or, if not available, comparable equipment. 
c.  A site plan illustrating all structures, disposal areas, staging areas, special waste areas, internal drive aisles, parking areas, and other items required for operation of the proposed facility. Square footage and total floor area ratio of each building shall be labeled and total impervious surface area of the site shall be indicated on the plan. 
d.  A vicinity map or aerial photograph, taken no more than one (1) year prior to the application, showing the facility site and relevant surface features located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed facility. 
e.  A regional map showing the project location in relation to major roadways and population centers and how the location meets the setback requirements of this section. Multiple maps may be submitted. 
f.  A regional map showing the haul routes to be utilized to haul material to the facility. 
g.  A closure plan. 
h.  A contingency plan appropriate for the type of facility to cover operational interruptions and emergencies such as fires, explosions, or natural disasters. 
i.  An emergency plan appropriate for the type of facility to respond to emergencies such as fires, explosions, or natural disasters. 
j.  A statement of how the applicant will demonstrate financial responsibility for the closing and long-term care of the facility. 
k.  An engineer's certification that the facility and all equipment thereof will meet or exceed the design requirements set forth by the state for this type of facility and all county requirements including the industrial performance standards provisions of this Code. 
l.  Current and projected population and area to be served by the proposed site. 
(2)  High impact waste facilities. 
a.  In addition to the standard application requirements and the additional general waste and debris facility application requirements, the following information shall be submitted upon application for any high impact waste facility: 
1.  A needs analysis including market surveys, letters of commitment and contracts, and any other information required by the county. 
i.  For a solid waste disposal facility, the analysis needs to determine that the added disposal capacity is required in order to service permanent county residents. 
ii.  For all other facilities, the analysis must show how the facility will benefit permanent county residents. 
2.  A traffic impact analysis evaluating the trip generation of the proposed facility including: 
i.  Ingress, egress, and access control to the site. 
ii.  The impact(s) of the proposed facility on the transportation system which will support the proposed facility, including anticipated increases in road maintenance requirements. 
iii.  The estimated public cost of maintaining the area's transportation system. 
iv.  Any other information required by the county engineer. 
3.  A public facilities impact analysis evaluating the impacts of the proposed facility on schools, parks, hospitals, and potable water supplies within two (2) miles of the proposed facility. 
4.  An environmental impact analysis evaluating the impacts of the proposed facility on: 
i.  Conservation areas, aquatic preserves, and other natural water bodies within two (2) miles of the proposed facility. 
ii.  Endangered or threatened species which occur on or utilize the property on which the proposed facility is to be developed or occur on or utilize adjacent property (as known). 
iii.  Air quality within one and one-half (1½) mile from the site, noting direction of the prevailing wind. 
iv.  Wildlife habitat and native vegetative communities on the site. 
v.  Surface and groundwater quality within one-half (½) mile from the site (the analysis must include a map showing all Class I surface waters, as defined by the FDEP, within three (3,000) feet of the boundary of the subject property). 
vi.  Impacts on any Class I waterways within the watershed where the site is located. 
vii.  Any areas of the subject property that lie within the one hundred-year flood zone. 
5.  For facilities that receive and process, store, or dispose of putrescible waste outdoors, a map showing any licensed airport runways within six (6) miles of the facility or a statement that none exist. If a runway is within six (6) miles, evidence shall be supplied that the facility notified the affected airport and received acknowledgement of that notification. 
6.  The following additional information shall be provided by an applicant for a solid waste disposal facility: 
i.  A plan of the site showing dimensions, locations of proposed and existing water quality monitoring wells or points, locations of soil borings, proposed plan of trenching or disposal areas, original elevations, proposed final contours, any previously filled waste disposal areas, and fencing. Cross sections shall be included showing both the original and proposed fill elevations. The scale of the plot plan shall not be greater than two hundred (200) feet to the inch. 
ii.  Topographic maps at a scale of not greater than two hundred (200) feet to the inch with five-foot contour intervals. These maps shall show the proposed fill area, any borrow area, access roads, grades required for proper drainage and cross sections of lifts, special drainage devices if necessary, fencing, and equipment facilities. 
b.  Due to the complexity of the information required for these facilities, the review timeframe for applications in association with these facilities shall be extended by at least two (2) months. The item shall not be placed on a board of zoning appeals agenda until review is complete. 
c.  All applications shall require review by the Charlotte County Solid Waste Division. This division may suggest further siting, development and operational conditions based on the specific facility and the proposed plans. These conditions may be applied as conditions of approval. 
d.  All applications shall require review by the fire marshall. 
(c)  High impact waste facilities approval standards. A high impact waste facility use shall only be approved if positive findings of fact can be made for all of the following: 
(1)  The proposed facility is appropriately sited as determined through review of the standards, requirements, analysis and facility operations plan. 
(2)  Approval of the facility will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(3)  The use and operation of the proposed facility will not endanger the public health or safety. 
(4)  There is a need for the proposed facility or there is a benefit gained to the county by development of the facility. 
(5)  The proposed facility is consistent with the adopted Charlotte County comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Safe and adequate access to the facility exists or will be provided for general and emergency services. 
(d)  High impact waste facilities development standards. 
(1)  Siting criteria. 

 
Unless the table of above indicates permitted, the facility is not permitted. 
(2)  Location setbacks. 

 
Other location standards: 
a.  No facility that requires air quality permits from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or Florida Department of Environmental Protection may be placed within one-half (½) mile of any land designated with a future land use map designation that is primarily for residential use. 
(3)  Other development standards. 

 
  
(e)  High impact waste facility financial requirements. 
(1)  Following approval of a special exception for a high impact waste facility but prior to any other development approvals, either the owner or the operator shall be bonded or insured, in an amount and form acceptable to the county attorney, to guarantee the financial responsibility of both the owner and operator for any liability that may be incurred in the operation of the facility and to provide that, upon closure, abandonment, or interruption of operation of the facility for any reason, all appropriate measures are taken to prevent damage to human health, safety, and welfare; the environment; and private and public property. If these financial responsibilities are addressed through the state and federal permitting requirements, that may satisfy the financial requirements. However, in granting approval to a facility pursuant to this section, the county may require additional, reasonable bonding or insurance as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(2)  Any bond or insurance obtained to satisfy this requirement shall be maintained in the amount established by the county and shall be maintained until the county determines that the owner and operator have satisfactorily closed the facility and until the county authorizes cancellation, modification, or liquidation of the bond or insurance. 
(f)  High impact waste facility inspections and enforcement. 
(1)  Representatives from the county shall, no less than twice a year, inspect all facilities subject to this section for compliance with the provisions contained herein. Such inspections will, at a minimum, verify that landscape buffers are being maintained in good order and that all materials found at the subject facility are allowed under the conditions of the permits and approvals issued for the facility. 
(2)  Any county official having official business pertaining to the enforcement of this section shall, upon identification, be admitted to the premises during regular business hours to conduct inspections and shall be given full and immediate access to the premises and all records required by this section. Failure to admit a county official onto a facility shall constitute a violation of these regulations and a stop work order shall be issued. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the facility will immediately cease operations. 
(3)  If, at any time during the operational life of the facility, it is determined that the facility is being operated in violation of the conditions of the permits, licenses or approvals which pose an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the general public or surrounding properties, a stop work order shall be issued which shall remain in force and effect until the facility is brought into compliance with such conditions and damage to surrounding properties, if any, is remedied. For purposes of enforcement, each violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-071, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-71. - Essential services. 
Essential services shall be permitted in CG, CT, IG and II zoning districts and permitted by special exception in AG, EM, ES, RMF-T, OMI, RE, RSF, RMF, MHP, MHC, RVP and CN zoning districts. The term "essential services" shall include utility facilities, including sewage treatment plants and lift stations, water wells, storage tanks, pumping stations, and water treatment plants; electric generating plants, distribution, equipment storage and transformer stations; gas pumping, metering, processing, distribution and storage; and telephone and cable television facilities. The term shall not include water wells, treatment plants, and septic tanks which are not associated with a utility facility, nor shall it include transmission and distribution lines. Essential services shall be required to comply with all other requirements as set forth within the land development regulations. The following standards shall also apply: 
(1)  New sewage treatment plants shall be no closer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential structure. Expansion to existing sewage treatment plants shall be exempt from this setback requirement. Additionally, sewage treatment plants, when a part of a manufactured home park or a recreational vehicle park, shall be exempt from the above setback requirement. 
(2)  New water treatment plants shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet to any residential structure. Expansion to existing water treatment plants shall be exempt from this setback requirement. 
(3)  Holding ponds required for the operation of sewage treatment facilities shall be required to be set back a minimum one hundred (100) feet from any residential structure, or fifty (50) feet from the residential property line, whichever is greater. Measurement shall be from the residential structure or property line to the edge of the water. 
(4)  No variance to the above minimum setback requirements shall be allowed. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 89-47, § 7, 6-22-89; Ord. No. 91-06, § 2, 2-26-91; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-007, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15) 
Sec. 3-9-72. - Fences; walls. 
(a)  In all residential districts except residential estate (RE), side and rear setback requirements shall not apply to fences and walls six (6) feet high or less behind the minimum front setback line, but must meet the requirements set forth in section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections. Front setback requirements shall not apply to opaque fences or walls three (3) feet high or less or nonopaque fences or walls four (4) feet high or less. Fences and walls exceeding six (6) feet in height shall maintain the minimum setback requirements set forth in each zoning district. 
(b)  In all nonresidential districts and the RE district, fences and walls located on lot lines shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height, but must meet requirements set forth in section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections. Front setback requirements shall apply to opaque fences or walls four (4) feet or higher. Fences and walls exceeding eight (8) feet in height shall maintain the minimum setback requirements set forth in each zoning district. All commercial fencing or walls must be consistent with the provisions set forth in the Landscaping Regulations of this code. 
(c)  Any fence properly permitted along a roadway property line may be required to be relocated should that roadway be widened in the future to maintain the requirements set forth in section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections, as well as property visibility to adjoining lots for safety purposes. 
(d)  Fences charged with electricity are permitted only in agriculture (AG), and excavation and mining (EM) districts as well as in RE district with an approved special exception for agricultural uses. 
(e)  Barbed wire fencing shall be permitted only: 
(1)  In AG and EM districts; 
(2)  In commercial and industrial districts on top of fences or walls; and 
(3)  Around institutional uses and utility installations in any district. 
(4)  In RE district with an approved special exception for agricultural uses. 
(f)  Fences and walls exceeding six (6) feet in height shall be permitted and must maintain the minimum setback requirements set forth in each zoning district where the fence or wall is located. 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, the height of the fence or wall shall be measured from the finished grade of the site where the measurement is taken, excluding berms. 
(h)  All fences and walls shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent property or the public right-of-way. All fence posts must be located on the inside of the fence facing the property on which the fence is located unless the fence is designed and constructed to look the same on both sides. No element of fences and walls shall encroach on an adjacent lot or right-of-way. 
(i)  Gates, columns, posts, and finials may exceed the maximum height of the fence by no more than one (1) foot. Pergolas or arches associated with a gate or entrance may be permitted up to ten (10) feet in height. 
(j)  If the property abuts a waterbody, no fence or wall greater than four (4) feet in height shall be permitted closer than ten (10) feet to the mean high water line, seawall, or the property line, whichever is more restrictive. 
(k)  Subdivision or resort perimeter walls may be approved through the site plan review process without maintaining the minimum setback requirements set forth in each zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2015-008, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15; Ord. No. 2018-026, § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-9-73. - Fertilizer regulations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide for the regulation of fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus and to provide specific management guidelines for its application in order to minimize the negative environmental effects said fertilizers have in and on Charlotte County's canals, estuaries, interior wetlands, the near-shore waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Collectively these water bodies are a natural asset, which are critical to the environmental, recreational, cultural and economic well-being of the county and the surrounding areas and contribute to the general health and welfare of the public. Recent red tide blooms, accumulation of red drift algae on local beaches have heightened community concerns about water quality and eutrophication of estuary, bay, river and coastal waters. Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in fertilizer entering the water bodies in and around Charlotte County is a crucial step towards improving and maintaining water and habitat quality. 
(b)  Definitions. For this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Applicator: Any person who applies, in any manner, fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants in Charlotte County. 
Best management practices: Turf and landscape practices which minimize the negative environmental impacts of installation and maintenance of landscapes, that includes training programs, approved by Charlotte County, that includes, at a minimum, the most current version of the "Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida, June 2002," as revised and the more stringent requirements set forth in this section. 
Code enforcement official: Any designated employee or agent of Charlotte County whose duty is to enforce the Code of Laws and Ordinances of Charlotte County, Florida. 
Commercial fertilizer applicator: Any applicator who applies fertilizer in exchange for money, goods, services or other valuable consideration. 
Fertilizer: Any substance or mixture of substances, including pesticide/fertilizer mixtures such as "weed and feed" products, that contains one (1) or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. 
Guaranteed analysis: The percentage of plant nutrients or measures of neutralizing capability claimed to be present in a fertilizer. 
Landscape plant: Any native or exotic tree, shrub, or groundcover (excluding turf). 
Low maintenance zone: An area a minimum of six (6) feet wide adjacent to water courses which is planted and managed in order to minimize the need for fertilization, watering, and mowing. 
Pasture: Land used for livestock grazing that is managed to provide feed value. 
Person: Any natural person, business, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, club, organization, and/or any group of people acting as an organized entity. 
Slow release nitrogen: Nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for plant uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the plant longer than a reference rapid or quick release product. 
Turf: A piece of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass, sod, or lawn. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall be applicable to and shall regulate any and all applicators of fertilizer and areas of application of fertilizers within the unincorporated area of Charlotte County, unless such applicator is specifically exempted by the terms of this section. 
(d)  Fertilizer content and application rate, impervious surfaces, and buffer and low maintenance zones. 
(1)  Fertilizer content and application rate. Fertilizer containing phosphorus shall not be applied to turf and/or landscape plants within Charlotte County at application rates which exceed 0.25 pounds P 2 O 5 /1,000 square feet per application nor exceed 0.50 pounds P 2 O 5 /1,000 square feet per year. 
a.  Fertilizers applied to turf and/or landscape plants within Charlotte County shall contain no less than fifty (50) percent slow release nitrogen per guaranteed analysis label. 
b.  Fertilizers should be applied to turf and/or landscape plants at the lowest rate necessary. 
c.  Nitrogen content. Applicators shall follow and not exceed Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Urban Turf Fertilizer Rule 5E-1.003 Labels or Tags' Fertilization Guidelines for Established Turf-grass Lawns South Region Nitrogen Recommendations for nitrogen pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet total per year: 
(i)  Bahia-grass: Two (2) to four (4) pounds. 
(ii)  Bermuda-grass: Five (5) to four (4) pounds. 
(iii)  Centipede-grass: Two (2) to three (3) pounds. 
(iv)  St. Augustine-grass: Four (4) pounds. 
(2)  Impervious surface. Fertilizer shall not be applied, spilled, or otherwise deposited on any impervious surfaces. Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf, landscape plants and/or any other Legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater rains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies. 
(3)  Buffers and low maintenance zones. Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten (10) feet, or three (3) feet if a deflector shield is used, of any pond, stream, water course, lake, canal or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (Chapter 62-340, Florida Administrative Code) or from the top of a seawall. 
a.  A voluntary six-foot low maintenance zone is strongly recommended, but not mandatory, from any pond, stream, water course, lake, or canal or any designated wetland or from the top of a seawall. Additionally, care should be taken to prevent the over spray of aquatic weed products in this zone. 
b.  In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or vegetative debris either intentionally or accidentally, be deposited or discharged into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, water bodies or roadways. 
(e)  Mode of application. Spreader deflector shields are required when applying fertilizer via broadcast spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, buffer zones and water bodies, including wetlands. 
(f)  Restricted season. No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen or phosphorous to turf or landscape plants between June 1st through September 30th. 
(g)  Exemptions. The provision of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Golf courses. For all golf courses, the provisions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection [FDEP] document, "BMPs for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality on Florida Golf Courses, January 2007," as updated, shall be followed when applying fertilizer to golf courses. 
(2)  Athletic fields. For athletic fields applicators are encouraged to apply the concepts and principles embodied in the "Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida, June 2002," while maintaining the health and function of their turf and landscape plants. 
(3)  Agricultural operations. Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right to Farm Act, F.S. section 823.14. Additionally, this section shall not apply to other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right to Farm Act that have pastures used for grazing livestock. 
(4)  Turf and/or landscape plants. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section during the first sixty (60) days after installation or planting, provided documentation for newly established turf and/or landscape plants is maintained to support this exemption. Pursuant to this exemption, newly planted turf and/or landscape plants may be fertilized in the buffer zone identified in subsection (c)(3) during the sixty-day establishment period. 
(h)  Training and enforcement. All commercial applicators of fertilizer within the unincorporated area of Charlotte County shall abide by and successfully complete a Charlotte County approved best management practices training program. Persons working as employees and under the direct and physical supervision of commercial applicators who hold a current certificate of completion shall be exempt from the requirement to complete a Charlotte County training program. 
(1)  The training program shall include the most current version of the "Florida Green Industries Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources in Florida, June 2002," as revised, and shall include the requirement set forth in sections: timing of application, fertilizer content, application rates, impervious surfaces, buffers and low maintenance zones, and mode of application. 
(2)  A list of approved training programs shall be maintained by Charlotte County and the Charlotte County Web site, and the County Extension Services UF/IFAS offices. 
(3)  Upon successful completion and compliance with the requirements in this section and payment of any application fee established by Charlotte County, a certificate of completion and a vehicle decal will be provided by the county's environmental and extension services department. 
(4)  The vehicle decal shall be affixed and maintained on the exterior of all vehicles [lower right corner of back glass and trailers [right side of trailer tongue]] used in connection with the application of Fertilizers within the area regulated by this section. 
(5)  Other applicators, such as private homeowners, are encouraged to utilize the recommendations of the University of Florida IFAS Florida Yards and Neighborhoods programs. 
(6)  It is the intent hereof that the administrative, civil, and criminal penalties imposed herein be of such amount as to ensure immediate and continued compliance with this section. 
(7)  Any and all enforcement inspections or observations pursuant to this section shall be made only from areas accessible to the general public, unless specific permission is granted by a property owner to come on their property, or a search warrant is obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(8)  Accordingly, any code enforcement official may enforce the provisions of this section provided that the violation is personally observed by the official in regards to an applicator in relation to a particular parcel or property. Upon finding a violation, the code enforcement official may issue a verbal warning and may require the applicator to undergo other corrective actions necessary to remedy the violation. However, nothing contained herein shall prevent Charlotte County from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy any refusal to comply with, or violation of, this section. Such other lawful action shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. Further, nothing contained herein shall prevent the county from instituting and pursuing code enforcement proceedings. 
(9)  Additionally, any applicator that violates the provisions of this section shall be responsible for Charlotte County's costs of prosecution of any violation, including any costs to remedy or clean up any environmental condition caused by an act which constitutes a violation of this section. 
(i)  Administrative relief. Any applicator of fertilizer regulated by the provisions of this section may apply for an administrative variance from the zoning official, or designee, upon a written request, factually supported, showing that: 
(1)  As a result of soil content at the point of the proposed application or for other geographical, environmental or geological reasons or other circumstances, such person should not be required to adhere to the strict provisions of this section; and/or 
(2)  Such person is able and willing to use a less strict application method or alternative materials or methods as required by the zoning official or designee; 
Such administrative relief deemed appropriate shall be granted in writing specifically setting forth the party entitled to the administrative relief, the location or locations to which the relief applies, the length of time granted for such relief and any specific conditions applicable to such relief. 
(Ord. No. 2008-028, § 2, 3-18-0; Ord. No. 2011-017, § 2, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-74. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Some types of work can be conducted at home with little or no effect on the surrounding neighborhood. It is the intent of this section to allow the operation of home occupations as an accessory to the primary use in any residential dwelling unit and to regulate them so that a neighbor, under normal circumstances, will not be disturbed or inconvenienced. The following regulations are intended to allow residents to engage in a minor or major home occupation while ensuring that it does not become a detriment to the character and livability of the surrounding area. 
(b)  General conditions for home occupations. The following conditions must be met and complied with by all operators of any home occupation. 
(1)  Home occupations shall be subordinate to the allowed principal residential use. 
(2)  Home occupations shall be conducted only by a resident of the principal dwelling unit. 
(3)  No more than twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of a dwelling unit may be devoted to a home occupation. 
(4)  The principal use of the dwelling unit shall at all times during the conduct of the home occupation remain residential. 
(5)  Retail sales shall not be conducted on the premises, except via the internet, phone and mail. 
(6)  No more than one (1) nonilluminated wall sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, may be attached to the building. This sign must be on or next to the entrance. 
(7)  There shall be no exterior indication that the dwelling is being used for any purpose other than a residence, other than an allowed sign. Examples of prohibited alterations include, but are not limited to, construction of parking lots, paving of required yards, or adding commercial-like lighting. 
(8)  There shall be no outside storage of materials used in connection with the home occupation. 
(9)  No equipment shall be used in connection with a home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interference, or requires the storage of hazardous substances which are not typically incidental to a residential use. 
(10)  Deliveries or pick-ups of items associated with home occupations shall generally be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(11)  Any operator of a home occupation must obtain, and keep current for as long as the home occupation is in operation, a business tax receipt from the Charlotte County Tax Collector, also known as the "local business tax receipt". 
(12)  The following uses shall be prohibited from being operated as a home occupation. 
a.  Any type of repair, assembly, or storage of vehicles or equipment (such as automobiles, motorcycles, marine engines, golf carts, lawn equipment or chain saws), or of large appliances, such as washing machines, dryers, and refrigerators, or any other work related to motor vehicles. 
b.  Any business where employees come to the site to be dispatched to other locations. 
(c)  Minor home occupations. 
(1)  Minor home occupations include, but are not limited to, internet sales, professional or paraprofessional services, consulting, home-made crafting, artist studios, and home offices. 
(2)  A minor home occupation is allowed without the need for a special exception provided it complies with all of the general conditions established above as well as all of the following conditions. 
a.  The minor home occupation shall register with the county. 
b.  No customers or clients may come to the home at any one (1) time. 
c.  Employees from outside the home are prohibited. 
(d)  Major home occupations. 
(1)  Major home occupations include, but are not limited to, beauty or barber shops, professional or paraprofessional services, consulting, animal grooming, and home offices. 
(2)  A major home occupation may be allowed as a special exception use provided it complies with all of the general conditions established above as well as all of the following conditions and any conditions that may be added by the BZA. 
a.  No more than two (2) customers or clients may visit the home at any one (1) time. 
b.  Customers or clients may visit the home for purposes related to the home occupation between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless different hours of operation are set by the special exception. 
c.  In addition to residents of the home employed in the home occupation, the board of zoning appeals may approve additional employees from outside of the home. 
d.  Additional off-street parking spaces may be required by the BZA. 
e.  The granting of a special exception to conduct a major home occupation shall be automatically conditioned upon continued compliance with all the requirements of this section. Failure of the operator to meet these requirements shall empower the BZA to revoke the special exception after notice and a public hearing. 
f.  The approval of a special exception for a major home occupation shall expire upon termination of the home occupation or a change in residency, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  Riding lessons in RE zoning district. 
a.  The property must be located in the rural service area. 
b.  No more than five (5) students at a time are receiving riding instructions. 
c.  Shall also conform subsections (d)(2)b.—f. 
d.  An accessory tack shop may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-072, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-75. - Industrial performance standards. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to standards imposed by other governmental authorities, including the state department of environmental regulation, the standards in this section shall apply to the permitting of industrial uses. 
(b)  Radioactive emission. There shall be no radiation emitted from materials or byproducts that creates a dangerous level of radioactivity at any point. Radiation emission shall not exceed those levels established as safe by the United States Bureau of Standards. Radioactive material storage or disposal of radioactive waste is prohibited. 
(c)  Electromagnetic interference. Electromagnetic interference shall be defined as disturbances of an electromagnetic nature which are generated by the use of electrical equipment, other than sources of electromagnetic energy, which disturbances interfere with the operation of electromagnetic receptors. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of electromagnetic radiation for any purpose unless such source shall comply with then applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Further, operations in compliance with Federal Communications Commission regulations shall be unlawful if such radiation causes an abnormal degradation in the performance of other electromagnetic receptors or electromagnetic radiators because of proximity, primary field, blanketing spurious reradiation, conducted energy and power or telephone systems or harmonic content. The determination of "abnormal degradation in performance" shall be made in accordance with good engineering practices as defined in the principles and standards of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, the Institute of Radio Engineers and the Radio Manufacturers' Association. In case of any conflict between the standards and principles of the above named groups, the following priority of interpretation shall apply: 
(1)  American Institute of Electrical Engineers; 
(2)  Institute of Radio Engineers; and 
(3)  Radio Manufacturers' Association. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain without a permit any source of electromagnetic energy, the radiated power from which exceeds one thousand (1,000) watts. 
(d)  Smoke; dust; dirt. Emission of visible smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash or any particulate matter from any pipes, air vents or other openings or from any other source into the air shall meet state department of environmental regulation standards. Fuels shall be smokeless or shall prevent emission of fly ash or cinders into the air. 
(e)  Fumes; vapors; gases. It shall be unlawful for any person to emit fumes, vapors or gases of a noxious, toxic or corrosive nature which cause danger to humans, animals, vegetation or any form of property. 
(f)  Sewage; industrial waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge liquid or solid waste into any public sewage disposal system which shall overload such system or create detrimental effects in the flow and treatment of public sewage. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any industrial waste into any private sewage disposal system, stream or the ground of any kind or nature which would contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements or conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate solid waste conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or dispose of industrial waste, solids or liquids within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(g)  Measurement of emissions. Measurement of an emission at the property line on which the principal use is located for all districts except IG and measurement of the emission at the district boundaries for all properties zoned IG shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Vibration. There shall be no perceptible earth vibration. All stamping machines, punch presses, press brakes, hot forges, steam board hammers or similar devices shall be placed on shock-absorbing mountings and on suitable reinforced concrete footings. No machine shall be loaded beyond the capacity prescribed by the manufacturer. 
(2)  Heat, cold, dampness or movement of air. Activities which produce any adverse effect on the temperature, motion or humidity of the atmosphere shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Noise. The permitted level of noise or sound emission shall not exceed the values in any octave band of frequency in the following table. Sound pressure levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that conform to the specifications published by the American Standards Association. 
a.  For industrially zoned property: 
Maximum Sound Pressure Level in Decibels (Decibel = 0.0002 dynes per square centimeter) 

 
b.  For all other property: It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the level of noise or sound emission to exceed at any time the average noise level prevailing for the same hour, as generated by street and traffic activity. The determination of noise level shall be measured with a sound level meter conforming to the specifications published by the American Standards Association. 
(4)  Odor. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the points of measurement. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any such odor shall be provided with both a primary and secondary safeguard system so that control may be maintained in the event of failure of the primary safeguard system. Chapter 5, Air Pollution Abatement Manual, copyright 1951, published by Manufacturing Chemists, Inc., Washington, D.C., is hereby incorporated in this section as a guide in determining quantities of offensive odors. 
(5)  Glare. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights, high temperature processing, combustion, welding or other source of high intensity lighting, so as to be visible at the points of measurement. 
(h)  Administration of performance standards in industrial districts. Prior to the establishment of industrial uses in industrial districts, every person shall apply for such uses under the following procedures: 
(1)  Application—Generally. Application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for any industrial use shall be submitted to the zoning official. The applicant shall also submit, in duplicate, a plan for the proposed construction or development, including a description of the proposed machinery operations, products and specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used in restricting the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements previously referred to in this section. The applicant shall also acknowledge, in writing, his understanding of the applicable performance standards and shall submit an agreement to conform with such performance standards at all times. Notwithstanding, no applicant shall be required to reveal any secret process or patented process and any information submitted will be treated as confidential, if so requested. 
(2)  Same—Review. If, after review of the application by the zoning official, there is found to be a reasonable doubt as to the likelihood of conformance with industrial performance standards, the zoning official shall refer the application to the board of zoning appeals. The board of zoning appeals may determine whether or not the building permit or certificate of occupancy should be issued. In the event the board of zoning appeals is unable to determine whether or not the applicant will conform to the performance standards set forth in this section, the board of zoning appeals may, on its own motion, request advice and recommendation from experts or consultants in such technical fields as may be deemed necessary. The costs of such experts or consultants shall be borne by the applicant. 
(i)  Enforcement. The zoning official shall cause any alleged violations of the industrial performance standards to be investigated. If there is found to be reasonable evidence that a violation exists, such violation shall be treated as a misdemeanor as provided in Chapter 63-1209, Laws of Florida. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-2014) 
Sec. 3-9-76. - Junklike conditions prohibited. 
(a)  The dumping or storage of junk, including abandoned vehicles, trailers and watercraft, is prohibited on any lot or within the public right-of-way unless such junk is stored in a completely enclosed building in such a manner and under such conditions that the storage of such junk shall not constitute a menace to the public health, safety, and generally welfare and thereby become a public nuisance, or unless within a lot on which such use is permitted. 
(b)  A single unlicensed motor vehicle, which by outward appearance appears operable, is permitted to be parked in the driveway of a developed lot. 
(c)  Upon the expiration of time for compliance as ordered by the code enforcement board or other approved methods, the county may cause the junk to be removed from the premises. 
(d)  The reasonable cost of such removal, and all incidental costs, shall be in addition to, and included in, the fine imposed by the code enforcement board and shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator, pursuant to F.S. § 162.09. 
(Ord. No. 2014-073, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-76.1. - Watercraft abandoned, derelict or hazard to navigation. 
(a)  All watercraft, of any type or configuration, which have been disposed of on public property including public waters in a wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled condition, or which are inoperative or unregistered or which appear to be in a state of decay or abandonment, including any craft, regardless of condition, which are an interference to navigation or a danger or threat of danger to the environment or the safety, health and welfare of the public, shall be prohibited on any waterway, shore or public property including submerged lands unless contained in an enclosed building or unless such watercraft are under repair and located in a district which permits the repair of watercraft. 
(b)  Upon discovery of abandoned watercraft in violation of this section, the County Administrator or its designee, or any law enforcement agency of the County, shall follow the procedures set forth in Florida statutes and agency rules, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Whoever opposes, obstructs, or resists any person authorized by subsection (b) upon conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. section 775.082 or section 775.083. 
(d)  Any person authorized by subsection (b) is immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entering upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this section. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, Charlotte County code compliance officers may: 
(1)  administer the provisions of this Code pursuant to F.S. section 705.1015, if such provisions pertain to lost or abandoned property; and 
(2)  issue citations or enforce any violations of Florida law related to abandoned or derelict watercraft located in Charlotte County, including on public property as defined in F.S. section 705.101; and 
(3)  bring citations or violations of Florida law before the code enforcement special magistrate pursuant to the procedures codified in section 1-1-15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-006, § 1, 1-24-17; Ord. No. 2019-028, § 1, 12-10-19) 
Sec. 3-9-77. - Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
Manufactured homes in MHP and MHC districts shall be limited to one (1) habitable story with customary additions, including lanais, carports and storage units which are manufactured for combination. Recreational vehicles used for temporary living purposes shall be allowed only in recreational vehicle parks. Commercial storage of unoccupied recreational vehicles shall be conducted only in CG, RVP and industrial districts. Commercial storage of unoccupied manufactured homes shall be conducted only in CG, MHP and industrial districts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-020, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15) 
Sec. 3-9-78. - Model homes. 
(a)  Generally. Model homes may be permitted in areas zoned for such residential units after a building permit has been obtained. A model home may be constructed in a commercial zoning district only if constructed in compliance with the commercial building code and shall not be occupied for living purposes. The model home shall not be required to comply with the commercial building code if, at the time of application, an affidavit is submitted stating that the model home will be removed when it ceases to be used as a model or that the structure will be brought into compliance if the use of the structure is altered. Sales from temporary branch offices within models located in residential districts shall be permitted only for the sale of units offered by the owners or developers provided that a model home shall not be used as a contractor's office, general real estate office, or a resale listing office unless such offices are located in zones permitting such occupations. The use of a model home as a sales or rental office in a nonresidential zoning district shall be conditioned on subsection (b). 
(b)  Parking. Each model home shall provide a minimum of four (4) parking spaces which shall be accessible to the public. Parking shall conform to the following development standards: 
(1)  All required parking shall be graded and improved with asphalt, concrete, paver block, turf block, brick, marl or shell. 
(2)  Each space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long; except that driveways shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet wide to allow for the parking of four (4) vehicles (stacking of two (2) deep is allowed). 
(3)  Each space shall be clearly delineated. 
(4)  No parking shall be located within a road right-of-way. 
(5)  Required parking may be allowed on an abutting lot only when under the same ownership as the model home. Proof of ownership shall be provided at the time of building permit application. 
(6)  All driveways must be graded and paved in accordance with the requirements set forth by the county engineering department. 
(c)  Model homes constructed in a commercial zoning district shall not be used as a dwelling unit unless the property is zoned OMI, CT and RMF-T prior to October 7, 1997. 
(d)  The following requirements shall apply to model homes constructed in a residential zoning district: 
(1)  The model home may be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(2)  Model home sites are permitted a single primary sign no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area, which must be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any adjacent lot. 
(Ord. No. 2014-074, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-79. - Off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(a)  Intent. The intent and purpose of this section is to ensure that all development provides for adequate storage and safe movement of vehicles in a manner consistent with the best practices of engineering and site design. This section is intended to require all uses to provide off-street parking on the premises it is intended to serve. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  New development. All uses shall be required to provide off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Expansion of existing uses. Existing buildings or uses which are enlarged in terms of floor area or seating capacity shall, if necessary, provide additional parking spaces for the additional floor area or seating capacity in accordance with this section. Existing buildings and uses which have existing off-street parking spaces may be modernized, altered, or repaired without providing additional parking spaces, provided there is no increase in total floor area or capacity. This subsection does not apply to increased seating capacity in a shopping center. 
(3)  Change of use. Any change in use of an existing building or unit thereof shall require additional off-street parking and off-street loading facilities for the new use in accordance with the requirements of this section unless: 
a.  The building, unit thereof, or use is located in a shopping center or an area with non-assigned common parking by deed or common public parking on a county right-of-way. 
b.  The building, unit thereof, or use is less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in floor area. 
c.  The new use has the same parking requirement or a less requirement than the previously existing use. 
(4)  Non-conforming parking. Existing parking which does not conform to the standards of this section may not be reduced except through the use of an alternative parking plan as provided in this section. 
(5)  Non-parking uses of parking spaces. Except for special events that receive a permit in accordance with the special event permit requirements of this section, required on-site parking spaces shall only be used for parking. 
(c)  Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this section, or unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context, the following terms when used in this section shall have the meanings indicated as follows: 
(1)  Park: There are two (2) types of parks, which are active parks and passive parks. Active parks are all recreational parks with the exception of those primarily used as nature trails, mitigation banks, or for environmental study and interpretation. Passive parks are any park facility not defined as an active use park herein. 
(2)  Take-out restaurant: Any restaurant that is engaged in preparing and selling food primarily for off-site consumption by patrons. Take-out restaurants may offer limited seating for patrons, but do not typically provide waiter or waitress service. Such establishments may include bagel, coffee, and donut shops; pizzerias and sandwich shops; take-out restaurants; or any similar establishment as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(d)  Calculation. 
(1)  Number of spaces. When the determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this regulation results in a fractional space, the fraction shall be counted as one (1) parking space. 
(2)  Floor area. Floor area shall be calculated as the sum of the gross floor area of all floors of a building as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. Alternatively, the applicant may measure from the interior face of the exterior walls to arrive at a calculation of floor area provided that the applicant submits an affidavit, certified by a registered architect or licensed professional engineer, as to its accuracy. 
(3)  Multiple and accessory uses. If a site contains multiple uses that could each be considered principal uses, parking shall be provided for each use listed in the table. 
(e)  General requirements. Off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the table below unless an adjustment to the parking requirement as permitted by this section is approved by the zoning official or his/her designee. Where a use not specifically listed in this section, the zoning official shall determine the applicable parking requirements and, in doing so, shall take into consideration development type(s) most similar to the proposed development and any parking study prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
Adjustments to parking requirements: 
(1)  The required number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced by not more than ten (10) percent of the total required number of off-street parking spaces where necessary to preserve existing trees in accordance with the standards of section 3-9-100.3, tree requirements. This reduction in parking may be authorized by the zoning official or his/her designee. Any applicant seeking a reduction shall submit a site plan illustrating the improvements, parking area, and locations, sizes, and types of trees to be preserved. A narrative describing in significant detail the measures to be taken to ensure the survivability of the trees shall accompany the site plan. The zoning official or his/her designee shall review the submission and render a determination on the requested reduction. An appeal of this determination shall be heard by the board of zoning appeals pursuant to section 3-9-6.1, administrative appeals. 
(2)  The required number of off-street parking spaces may be reduced as approved by the county engineer or his/her designee. Any applicant seeking a parking reduction shall submit a parking study prepared by a licensed professional engineer that provides justification for the requested reduction. At a minimum, the parking study shall address, where applicable: 
a.  The type of use(s). 
b.  Total square footage by use(s). 
c.  Estimated time of and number of spaces required at peak parking demand. 
d.  ADA-accessibility requirements. 
e.  Employment characteristics including, but not limited to, total number of employees and the number of employees per shift. 
f.  A description of any factors that may reduce or increase the parking demand 
The applicant may choose to further support the proposed number of parking spaces by providing documentation on the experience of similar uses located in the same or other jurisdictions. 

 
(1) Parking for employees shall be determined based on the number of employees on the largest shift during the site plan review process. 
(2) In accordance with section 3-9-78: Model Homes. 
(3) Motels/hotels with a restaurant or lounge require one (1) additional space/two hundred (200) square feet of restaurant or lounge area. Motels/hotels located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an interchange along I-75 shall provide five (5) percent additional spaces with a minimum size of ten (10) feet by forty (40) feet for accommodation of trucks, motor homes, etc. 
(4) Up to seventy (70) percent of the required parking spaces may be surfaced with a durable grass cover. Driveways, handicapped spaces and access aisles shall be paved. 
(5) In the absence of a specified sealing arrangement, the parking ratio shall be computed as every fifteen (15) square feet equals one (1) seat. 
(6) Swimming pools shall be counted as floor area. 
(7) One hundred (100) percent of the overflow parking may be allowed non-paved surface. 
(3)  In community redevelopment areas, the off-street parking can be accommodated via public and/or private parking garages. The availability of parking spaces within these garages shall be determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. The need of the parking spaces within these garages can be determined by a parking study prepared by a licensed professional engineer. 
(f)  Drive-up facilities. Any use providing drive-up facilities shall provide for the stacking of vehicles in accordance with the table below. Stacking spaces may not impede on-site or off-site traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces. Any overflow from stacking lanes shall be contained on the subject site, and shall not overflow onto adjacent properties under different ownership, the public right-of-way, or internal traffic aisles. 

 
(1) Stacking spaces shall be measured from the point of transaction (teller window order box, or equivalent) 
(2) Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(g)  Development standards. 
(1)  Required off-street parking spaces shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way, nor shall any required parking spaces be located in a dedicated parkway. 
(2)  Off-street parking spaces shall be designed such that backing movements are accomplished within the limits of the property. 
(3)  A full-size (standard) parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long. Parallel spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide by twenty-four (24) feet long. 
(4)  ADA-accessible parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Florida Statute and the Florida Accessibility Code within the Florida Building Code. 
(5)  For non ADA-accessible parking spaces, driveways and aisles, the required parking shall be graded and paved with a hard surface of asphalt, concrete, brick with the following exceptions: 
a.  Development on bridgeless barrier islands. 
b.  Bona fide agricultural uses. 
c.  Required parking associated with on-site, temporary construction offices. 
d.  Any parking that exceeds the required amount of parking defined by this section. 
e.  As otherwise permitted by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(6)  Each paved parking space shall be delineated by all-weather lines. 
(7)  Any parking area required to accommodate the sale, rental, or repair of vehicles shall be provided in addition to the required number of off-street parking spaces for any such use and shall be dimensioned, graded and paved in accordance with the standards of this section or as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(8)  All individual parking spaces shall be accessible at all times from a driving aisle intended to provide access to the space. Minimum aisle widths shall be as follows: 

 
In unique circumstances, thirty-degree or seventy-five-degree parking may be allowed at the discretion of the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(9)  Stacked parking of vehicles shall not be permitted except for stacking lanes required by this section and single-family residential and duplex uses wherein one car may be parking behind another one. For multi-family residential, stacked parking of vehicles may be approved through the site plan review process. 
(h)  Other. 
(1)  Except for special events such as seasonal promotions, sidewalk parking lot sales, fairs, carnivals, and tent sales, required off-street parking spaces shall not be used for sales, dead storage, repair, dismantling, or services of any type or kind, nor shall areas devoted to such activities count as meeting off-street parking requirements. 
(2)  Required off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land they are intended to serve. Shared parking facilities for developments or uses with different operating hours or different peak periods may be permitted between properties if the shared parking complies with all of the following standards: 
a.  Shared parking spaces shall be located within a quarter-mile of the primary entrance of all uses served by such an arrangement. A distance greater than a quarter-mile may be permitted subject to the approval of the zoning official or his/her designee. 
b.  All shared parking proposals shall be accompanied by a shared parking analysis that demonstrates the feasibility of the shared parking proposal and addresses, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peaking parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing parking spaces. The shared parking analysis shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or other individual as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
c.  All shared parking proposals shall require an agreement between all property owners, acceptable to the county attorney's office, that will run with the land until such time as the need is extinguished. An executed agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the applicant and a certified copy shall be provided to the zoning official prior to the issuance of development approval. A shared parking agreement may be dissolved only if all required parking spaces will be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
d.  Where the uses subject to a shared parking agreement change, the zoning official or his/her designee shall have the authority to require a revised shared parking analysis and a new shared parking agreement when the revised shared parking analysis indicates additional parking is required. 
(3)  Required parking may be located on a separate, non-adjacent lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the following standards: 
a.  No private off-site parking shall be located more than a quarter-mile from the primary entrance of the building. Off-site parking may not be separated from the use served by an arterial road unless a grade separated pedestrian walkway is provided or other traffic control or remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
b.  Total parking spaces when combined or used together shall not be less than the sum of the requirements computed separately. 
c.  Any arrangement for combined off-street parking shall be subject to the recording of a legal instrument with the clerk of the court (reviewed by the county attorney), ensuring that such off-street parking will be maintained as long as the use or uses requiring such parking continue. The agreement shall contain a legal description of subject property, measures to ensure maintenance of said facility and shall be approved by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
d.  In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, the county shall require an agreement between all property owners and the county, acceptable to the county attorney's office, that will run with the land until such time as the need is extinguished. An executed agreement shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court by the applicant and a certified copy shall be provided to the zoning official prior to the issuance of development approval. An off-site parking agreement may be dissolved only if all required parking spaces will be provided in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
e.  Where the uses relying on an off-site parking area change, the zoning official or his/her designee shall have the authority to require a revised parking analysis and a new off-site parking agreement when the revised parking analysis indicates additional parking is required. 
f.  Off-site parking may not be used for the storage of commercial vehicles or equipment. 
g.  Off-site parking areas must be developed in accordance with all applicable provisions of the County Code of Ordinances. 
(i)  Off-street loading. 
(1)  Commercial and industrial operations with a floor area of more than six thousand (6,000) square feet shall provide space for loading and unloading operations in a manner that does not impede the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over sidewalks, streets and alleys. Any deviation from this requirement may be approved by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(2)  Every off-street loading and unloading space shall have direct access to a public street or alley and shall have the following minimum dimensions: 
Length: Thirty (30) feet 
Width: Twelve (12) feet 
Height: Fourteen (14) feet 
(3)  The required loading area shall be provided on the same lot or parcel it serves and shall be separate and distinct from off-street parking arrangements. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 89-29, § 1, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 91-09, § 2, 2-26-91; Ord. No. 92-67, § 1, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 2003-061, § 11, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2011-030, § 3, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-028, § 1(Exh. A), 5-26-15) 
Cross reference— Tree requirements, § 3-2-186 et seq.; landscaped buffers, § 3-9-83. 
Sec. 3-9-79.1. - Parking of boats, recreational vehicles, trucks, and trailers. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to regulate the parking of boats, recreational vehicles (RVs), trucks, and trailers in a manner that promotes public safety, limits the parking of boats, RVs, trucks and trailers in residential districts or residential developments, and enhances the appearance of the residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  The parking of trucks and trailers which, pursuant to manufacturer design or aftermarket alterations, have or are capable of having tandem axles or two (2) rear wheels per side shall be prohibited on private property in residential districts or in residential developments. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
(1)  Tow trucks owned and operated by a company or individual on a rotational list maintained by the Florida Highway Patrol or a Florida local law enforcement agency for response to emergency requests for service but only when the operator is present on the premises. 
(2)  Pickup trucks with no more than two (2) rear wheels per side. For the purposes of this section, a pickup truck (as shown below) is defined as a light truck having an enclosed cab and original equipment manufacturer installed, integrated cargo bed enclosed with low sides and a tailgate at the rear. 

(3)  Service and delivery vehicles while engaged in loading, unloading or servicing on the premises. 
(c)  The following shall not be parked on any property less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or any undeveloped property in residential districts or residential developments unless such vacant property is located immediately adjacent to and abutting a developed property and owned by the same property owner: 
(1)  Cargo trailers with more than four (4) wheels or a cargo containment area greater than twenty (20) feet in length. 
(2)  Boat trailers with more than six (6) wheels or tri-axles. 
(3)  Boats or RVs shall not be stored or parked on stands, jack stands, blocks, or other similar apparatus in residential districts not including integrated leveling stands. 
(d)  Boats, RVs, or trailers parked on private developed property in residential districts or residential developments: 
(1)  Shall be the personal property of the owner, tenant or guest thereof residing on the property. 
(2)  Shall be operable and in good repair. 
(3)  Shall be licensed and registered as required by state law, where applicable. 
(4)  Shall be parked behind the leading edge of the principal building or within a paved driveway. 
(5)  Shall not encroach upon any property line. 
(6)  Shall not be used for living, sleeping, housekeeping or business purposes. 
(e)  The storage of boats, recreational vehicles, or trailers on any public right-of-way or vacant property, or any portion thereof shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section, storage shall mean any boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle that is unhitched from a motorized vehicle. 
(f)  Motor vehicles which are generally not permitted on roadways by the State of Florida or Charlotte County shall be stored within a fully enclosed building in all residential zoning districts except AG, EM or RE zoning districts. In certain areas where special provisions allow golf carts on roads, such golf carts may be parked or stored on a paved driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2015-038, § 1(Exh. A), 7-28-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-038, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 28, 2015, amended § 3-9-79.1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3-9-79.1, pertained to parking of trucks, trailers, travel trailers, and derived from Minutes of Dec. 8, 1981, § 8; Ord. No. 89-47, § 17, adopted June 22, 1989; Ord. No. 97-112, § 4, adopted Nov. 18, 1997; Ord. No. 2002-010, § 3, adopted March 26, 2002; Ord. No. 2012-001, § 1, adopted Jan. 24, 2012; and Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 2-4. 
Sec. 3-9-80. - Pain management clinics. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide development, location, and operation criteria for pain management clinics in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
(b)  Applicability. This section is applicable to all pain management clinics within unincorporated Charlotte County. 
(c)  Separation requirements. Pain management clinics and pharmacies shall not be colocated on the same property. Further, pain management clinics shall not operate within one thousand (1,000) feet of any pharmacy, school, day care center, or house of worship. Pain management clinics also shall not operate within two (2) miles of Interstate 75. Pain management clinics shall not operate within five (5) miles of another pain management clinic. Distances shall be measured by a straight line without regard to intervening buildings from the centerpoint of the building within which the proposed pain management clinic is to be located to the centerpoint of the building in which the pharmacy, school, day care facility, or place of worship is located, or centerpoint of the right-of-way for Interstate 75. The use of aerial maps and a geographic information system shall be a sufficient method to measure any separation distance. 
(d)  Operating hours. Pain management clinics shall only be allowed to operate between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Pain management clinics shall not operate on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2011-030, § 4, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-81. - Patio houses. 
(a)  In certain districts, as a permitted use or a conditional use, the owner of a lot or contiguous lots exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in area may construct patio houses. Patio houses are single-family detached dwelling structures, each on individually platted lots and designed to provide maximum usage of outdoor living space while ensuring privacy from adjacent housing by providing a side yard on one (1) side of the structure and no side yard or a reduced yard on the other side. 
(b)  All requirements of the subdivision regulations and the zoning district in which the patio houses are located shall be complied with, except that no side yard shall be required on one (1) side of each parcel but the combined side yard requirement of the applicable zoning district shall be required on the opposite side of each parcel. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate a patio house closer than the combined side yard distance from any other patio house nor shall any person locate a patio house closer than the minimum setback of the applicable zoning district from the property line of any other dwelling unit not a patio house. As a condition of final approval, covenants running with the land shall be submitted, providing for the aforementioned side yard setbacks and maintenance easements, if applicable, for each lot within the subject property. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-021, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15) 
Cross reference— Subdivision regulations, Ch. 3-7. 
Sec. 3-9-82. - Places of worship. 
The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the establishment of places of worship within certain zoning districts. Unless specifically stated in other sections of this Code, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Any places of worship, regardless of size, shall be subject to site plan approval through the site plan review committee. Those places of worship located in an existing building having parking in accordance with section 3-9-79 are exempt from this requirement. 
(2)  The minimum property size for places of worship is located in RSF and RMF zoning districts shall be two (2) acres. No variance from this requirement shall be allowed. 
(4)  Parking shall be in accordance with section 3-9-79. 
(5)  Places of worship shall be allowed as principal permitted uses in accordance with all development standards in the OMI, CG, CN, and CT zoning districts. 
(6)  Places of worship shall be allowed by special exception in the following zoning districts: AG, RE, RSF, RMF, MHC, MHP and MHS. 
(7)  Places of worship shall be prohibited in the ES, RMF-T, IG and I zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-075, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-83. - Service stations, automotive. 
(a)  Generally. Service stations, truck stops and gasoline pumping stations shall comply with this section. 
(b)  Lot and building requirements. The following lot and building requirements shall apply: 
Minimum lot width, feet .....150 
Minimum lot depth, feet .....100 
Minimum setback from public right-of-way lines: 
To curb from principal building, feet .....50 
To curb from pump island, feet: 
For one-pump island .....25 
For two-pump islands one in front of the other .....15 
To edge of canopy, feet .....15 
Minimum setback of all buildings, structures and storage tanks from all property lines not abutting a public road, feet .....20 
When a service station is to be located on a corner lot which also abuts a street to the rear of said lot, the setback for the service station building shall be fifty (50) feet from the front and side streets and shall be twenty (20) feet from the rear street. 
(c)  Storage tanks. All storage tanks shall be underground. 
(d)  Storage, sale and rental of vehicles and trailers. The storage of vehicles and trailers shall be permitted only as incidental to the customary servicing of vehicles and trailers, except that one (1) vehicle or trailer may be stored for each two hundred (200) square feet of land over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of lot area. The sale of vehicles and trailers shall be prohibited. The rental of vehicles or trailers shall be permitted provided that an additional two hundred (200) square feet of land over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of lot area is provided for each rental vehicle and/or trailer. 
(e)  Pavement. All lot surface areas upon which vehicles will move or be stored shall be paved with asphalt or cement/concrete, or an equivalent hard-surfaced, dustless material. 
(f)  Truck stops. Truck stops shall be permitted in CH districts, provided the lot has minimum frontage and depth of at least three hundred (300) feet and minimum setback of all buildings and structures including delivery pumps of fifty (50) feet from perimeter property lines. Landscaped buffers shall be provided as required in section 3-9-83. 
(g)  Gasoline and fuel pumps as accessory uses. Gasoline and fuel pumps may be installed as accessory uses to a principal use not classified as automotive service station in zones permitting service stations, provided fuel pumps and islands meet minimum setback requirements of this section. Upon the conversion of any discontinued service station or pumping station to any other use, fuel storage tanks shall be removed. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-84. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations to alleviate the adverse secondary effects of certain detrimental uses of land which tend to create a skid-row atmosphere where concentrated and which tend to degrade residential areas and public facilities when located in close proximity thereto. 
(b)  All sexually oriented businesses shall comply with requirements set forth in chapter I, article V, sexually oriented businesses. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than two thousand (2,000) feet to another sexually oriented business, measured on a straight line connecting the closest points of the buildings. 
(d)  No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet on a straight line from any residential or manufactured home district or use, any property zoned commercial tourist, any area within a planned development developed or intended to be developed for residential use. 
(e)  No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet measured on a straight line from any school, park, church, public recreation facility, or child care facility. 
(f)  At the time of application for an occupational license to operate any establishment subject to this section, the applicant shall provide a street address and legal description of the property containing the existing or proposed sexually oriented business, accompanied by a survey signed and sealed by a professional surveyor registered in the State of Florida which depicts the locations and distances to any residentially zoned property, any property zoned commercial tourist, or any school, park, church, public recreation facility, or child care facility measured on a straight line connecting the closest point of the buildings. If the building within which a proposed sexually oriented business would operate does not yet exist, the applicant must provide a site plan of the proposed establishment prepared by a professional architect or engineer registered in the State of Florida which, in conjunction with the survey, shall verify that the distance requirements set forth in this section shall be maintained. 
(g)  All doors, windows and other building openings of a structure housing a sexually oriented business shall be so located, covered or screened as to effectively prevent visual access into the interior of the building from any public area. 
(h)  The premises at which a sexually oriented business is located shall be buffered in such a way that no part of the sexually oriented business, which in any way conveys a message as to the goods or services offered therein, is visible from any residentially zoned property, any property zoned commercial tourist, or any school, park, church, public recreation facility, or child care facility. 
(i)  The premises at which a sexually oriented business is located shall have exterior lighting such as to eliminate any darkened areas within, for example, parking areas, around dumpsters, and building recesses. Such lighting shall be directional, recessed, or otherwise controlled so as to not illuminate or become a nuisance to surrounding residential properties. 
(j)  Signage associated with any use subject to this section, whether on or off the site, shall not include any display or depiction, including silhouettes, of specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities. 
(k)  Applicability of this section: 
(1)  Any establishment which was considered a detrimental use under prior law because of a use which would be classified as a sexually oriented business under this chapter and which was granted a special exception for such use before the effective date of this section and which meets the definition of a sexually oriented business in this chapter shall be considered a sexually oriented business and may continue to operate the existing business at that location, subject to the requirements of section 1-10-125(c) of this Code, until the occurrence of any of the following: 
a.  The use is expanded, altered, modified, enlarged or intensified; or 
b.  The use violates any of the terms and conditions of the special exception; or 
c.  The special exception expires pursuant to section 3-9-6.2 of this Code. 
Provided, however, that upon the transfer of ownership of a business granted such a special exception, subsequent owners may continue to operate the existing business at that location, but shall be required to conform to all other requirements of chapter 1-10, article V, of this Code. 
(2)  Any establishment which was considered a detrimental use under prior law because of a use which would be classified as a sexually oriented business under this chapter but which was not required to obtain a special exception and which meets the definition of a sexually oriented business in this chapter shall be considered a sexually oriented business and may continue to operate the existing business at that location, subject to the requirements of section 1-10-125(c) of this Code, until the occurrence of any of the following: 
a.  The use is expanded, altered, modified, enlarged or intensified; or 
b.  The business fails to renew its occupational license by December 31 of any year; or 
c.  The use ceases for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or more for any reason; or 
d.  The transfer of ownership of the business. 
(3)  Any establishment which was not considered a detrimental use under prior law but which meets the definition of a sexually oriented business in this chapter shall be considered a sexually oriented business and may continue to operate the existing business at that location, subject to the requirements of section 1-10-125(c) of this Code, until the occurrence of any of the following: 
a.  The use is enlarged or intensified; or 
b.  The business fails to renew its occupational license by December 31 of any year; or 
c.  The use ceases for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or more for any reason; or 
d.  The transfer of ownership of the business. 
(4)  Upon the occurrence of any of the events set forth above in the absence of a valid sexually oriented business license for the premises, said sexually oriented business shall cease operation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-009, § 1(Exh. A), 2-24-15) 
Sec. 3-9-85. - Signs. 
1.1.1.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate private signage on private property so that such signs will not, by their reason, size, location, construction or manner of display, endanger the public safety by distracting, confusing, misleading or obstructing the vision necessary for pedestrian or vehicular traffic safety, or detract from the community appearance as part of the county's concerted effort to enhance the aesthetic qualities of the county. 
1.1.2.  Definitions. 
A.  Additional signs or signage (as defined herein) means signs that are not permanently attached to the ground, a building or other structure. Such signs are temporary in nature and may be removed easily in the event of an approaching tropical storm or hurricane. Generally, these signs include, but are not limited to, banners, pennants, streamers, wind powered signs, window signs, wind socks, flags and yard signs. 
B.  Building frontage means the length of the building that directly faces a right-of-way, as measured by the distance between the outermost points of the building parallel to the right-of-way. 
C.  Nonconforming sign (as defined herein) means any sign lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which the particular provisions of this article rendering that sign no longer in conformity with this article is derived. 
D.  Primary sign (as defined herein) means any permanent freestanding or building signage, which, due to its nature or design, requires a building permit in order to ensure conformity with applicable building codes. Examples include signs that require the laying of a foundation, signs which are electrified, and signs which must meet applicable wind-load requirements. 
E.  Right-of-way means any Legal public vehicular throughway, such as a street or internal road intended to be used by the traveling public twenty-four (24) hours a day. For purposes of this article, the definition does not include alleys, limited access easements, loading zones, or unimproved rights-of-way. 
F.  Sign means any outdoor display comprehensible from a right-of-way using letters, words, figures, symbols, pictures, designs or a combination thereof to advertise, attract attention, indicate direction, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
G.  Sign allocation means the total amount of square footage available for any unit of land, encompassing both the primary and additional signage permissible for nonresidential properties. 
H.  Sight triangle is the triangular area at the intersection of two (2) vehicular travel ways where a driver's vision of oncoming traffic must remain unobstructed. Such sight triangles shall consist of two (2) thirty-foot segments running at the edge of the right-of-way which meet at the intersection, and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the thirty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. For driveways, sight triangles shall consist of two (2) twenty-foot segments running at the property line, and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the twenty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. There shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and six (6) feet above grade. The county engineer may approve alternative sight triangles under circumstances where the requirements of this section cannot be met. 
I.  Street frontage means the length of the unit that directly faces a right-of-way. 
J.  Unit means any subdivided or otherwise legally created and definable tract of land, including individual storefront units in nonresidential multitenant structures, which is able to be legally developed in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
K.  Vehicle signs (as defined herein) means any sign that is attached, painted, or placed onto or inside a parked vehicle. 
L.  Window sign (as defined herein) means any sign attached to or visible through any window. 
M.  Yard sign (as defined herein) means any freestanding sign placed along a property frontage. 
1.1.3.  Signs on public property. 
A.  Signs on public property. 
1.  No private sign shall be erected, altered or maintained over or upon any publicly owned property or right-of-way. 
2.  Violators of paragraph 1. of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or term of sixty (60) days imprisonment per violation, or both. A second conviction may result in penalties of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or up to one (1) year imprisonment, or both. 
3.  Existence of unauthorized signage on public property shall not alone be sufficient evidence of a violation of paragraph 1. for the criminal penalties of paragraph 3. to attach without an eyewitness to the placement of the unauthorized signage. 
4.  The county may remove any such sign, which shall then be held for a minimum period of five (5) days. At any time during the five-day holding period the owner of the sign may reclaim the sign after having paid a removal and storage fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). Signs not reclaimed by the owner during this period shall be discarded. 
5.  Individual handheld signs are permitted on designated pedestrian sidewalks and pathways. 
1.1.4.  General provisions. 
The following regulations apply to all signs authorized under this article: 
A.  Florida Building Code. The Florida Building Code shall control the construction, inspection, maintenance, and removal of signs. Prior to the erection of any sign the building department of the county should be consulted to determine if a building permit shall be required. 
B.  Sign permit required. 
1.  A sign permit is required prior to erection, construction, installation or alteration of any primary sign. 
2.  A permit shall be required for all additional signs. 
a.  Time. After March 31, 2018, no more than two (2) display periods in a calendar year shall be permitted. Each display period shall not exceed a maximum of forty-five (45) days. 
b.  Size. The maximum size of the total display shall be thirty-two (32) square feet. 
c.  Window signs shall require an annual permit. 
3.  Normal maintenance, as defined by the Florida Building Code, of existing permitted signs such as painting, or repairs to existing signs which do not alter the size or height of the sign shall not require a permit or inspection. Removal and reinstallation of a sign face shall not be considered normal maintenance, and a sign permit shall be required. 
C.  Other provisions. 
1.  All sides of a sign shall be finished. 
2.  Other than primary building signs, no sign shall have a total height at any point greater than twenty (20) feet above the crown of the adjoining right-of-way on which the parcel fronts. Where the parcel abuts more than one (1) right-of-way, the highest shall control. 
3.  All nonprimary signs must be removed or otherwise prevented from becoming a potential projectile in the event that a tropical storm or hurricane warning has been issued in the county. 
4.  All signs must be maintained in good repair, acceptable appearance and substantially similar to their original condition. 
D.  Sign area calculation. 
1.  The sign area shall be calculated as the area within the smallest regular geometric shape or combination of shapes which encompasses all the display elements (letters, numbers, figures, characters, corporate logos, etc.) of the sign, including blank areas between display elements. The area of the sign shall include all changing copy features such as letterboards or light boards. 
2.  Murals and other artwork will not be calculated towards allowable sign area to the extent it does not contain text, registered corporate logos, or other symbols that advertise the particular use, business, product or service rendered on the premises. 
3.  For irregularly shaped signs, the sign area shall be calculated as eighty (80) percent of the area within the smallest regular geometric shape or combination of shapes which encompasses all the display elements (letters, numbers, figures, characters, corporate logos, etc.) of the sign, including blank areas between display elements, but not including structural elements. 
4.  In the case of two-sided or multisided signs with the same face on each side, only one (1) face shall count toward the total aggregate area so long as: 
a.  With respect to multisided signs the angle of separation from the connection point cannot exceed ninety (90) degrees. 
b.  With respect to a double-faced (back-to-back) sign, there can be no separation between the backs of each face of the sign other than the structural supports to which each sign face is attached. 
1.1.5.  Signage in non-residential districts. 
A.  General provisions. 
1.  Any unit in a non-residential district is entitled to a sign allocation as provided in this article. Such allocation may be divided by the unit's owner in any manner they see fit. However, in no case shall the signage of a unit exceed its allocation. 
2.  In the event that one (1) or more contiguous units are engaged in a single commercial enterprise, the individual units will be treated as a single unified unit under the terms of this article. For the purposes of this article, separate commercial enterprises are those which maintain separate financial records, capital, property, and personnel. 
3.  No illuminated sign may exceed ten (10) candlepower per square foot, as measured ten (10) feet from the sign, and must shield lights from direct view. 
4.  Each unit is permitted one (1) freestanding primary sign per right-of-way frontage not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Where the size and shape of the unit would permit additional freestanding primary signs along other right-of-way frontages, such signs may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of another on the same unit. 
5.  Lots containing a "drive-through" window will be allowed one (1) additional free-standing sign. Such sign may be no more than four (4) square feet in size, no higher than forty-eight (48) inches, and at least six (6) feet from a curb cut. Additional primary signs, utilized for directional and wayfinding purposes only, such as "drive-thru" signs, are permissible, provided they do not exceed four (4) square feet. 
6.  All freestanding primary signs, greater than four (4) square feet, are required to display the street number of the unit, with the numbers being not less than eight (8) inches in height. 
7.  There are no setback requirements for signs, provided no portion of any sign shall extend beyond a private property line or into a sight triangle. 
8.  Each unit is permitted an unlimited number of primary building signs within the unit's sign allocation, provided that no individual building sign may exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
9.  Primary building signs shall not be located above the upper line of the parapet or the peak of the pitched roof. For purposes of this article, height shall be measured on a vertical line from the sign to the parapet or peak from each point along the top of the sign. Roof ornaments (such as domes, cupolas, steeples, and roof decks and rails) shall not be used in the calculation of sign heights. 
10.  No portion of any sign over a walkway or driveway, including frames or supporting structures, shall be less than eight (8) feet above the surface of such walkway or driveway. 
11.  Signs may have either digital or mechanical changeable copy, provided the message is not animated and that the message remains static for a minimum of fifteen (15) seconds between cycles. 
12.  Vacant units are limited to three (3) additional signs, provided their aggregate square footage does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
13.  In multitenant commercial properties each individual storefront unit shall be treated similar to any unit as defined herein, provided that multitenant parcels shall not be entitled to more than one (1) freestanding primary sign per right-of-way. 
B.  Calculation of sign allocation. 
1.  Each unit is entitled to an allocation of signage based on the greater of the unit's right-of-way or building frontage, calculated at a rate of three (3) square feet per linear foot of frontage. 
2.  Each unit shall be entitled to a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of signage and no unit may exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of signage. 
3.  For multitenant structures, each individual unit as defined herein is entitled to its own allocation separate and apart from any allocation for commonly owned property. 
C.  Noncommercial messages permitted in substitution. 
1.  No sign shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
2.  Whenever this article permits the erection of signs for commercial purposes or for the identification of the property on which the sign is located, the sign owner may substitute a noncommercial message in lieu of the message otherwise permitted. 
3.  The right to substitute the noncommercial message does not waive any other requirement imposed by the county as to number, size, construction, location, lighting, obscenity, safety or any other regulated attribute. 
4.  The right created by this subsection is one (1) of substitution and not one (1) of addition and may be performed as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign provided all other requirements of this article are met. 
D.  Sign classes. 

 
1.1.6.  Signage in residential and agricultural districts. 
1.1.6.1. Residential districts. 
A.  Every single-family residential parcel is permitted two (2) freestanding yard signs, provided they are located on private property and do not exceed four (4) square feet in area individually or one (1) sign up to six (6) square feet. Such yard signs must be temporary in nature and shall be removed fifteen (15) days after their purpose has been fulfilled. 
B.  Every residential parcel is entitled to three (3) freestanding flags, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet individually. 
C.  Multifamily residential parcels shall be treated as a single unit under this article. 
D.  Signs at the entrance to a community, subdivision, or multifamily complex, are permitted provided they do not exceed forty (40) square feet and are monument signs. 
E.  No signage in a residential district is permitted to be internally illuminated or backlit. 
1.1.6.2. Agricultural districts. 
A.  Every agriculturally zoned parcel is permitted ten (10) square feet of signage for every ten (10) acres of land. Vested lots of record under ten acres shall be entitled to a minimum of ten (10) square feet, regardless of acreage and must be located on private property. 
1.1.7.  Overlay districts. 
The following overlay districts include their own specific sign provisions: 
Charlotte Harbor CRA. 
U.S. 41 Overlay District. 
Manasota Key Overlay District. 
Babcock Ranch Overlay District. 
1.1.8.  Variances. 
Variances may be granted by the board of zoning appeals to exceed the size and height limitations or to exceed the number of signs permitted within this article, provided that all of the following conditions are found to exist: 
A.  That the characteristics unique to the parcel of land on which the sign(s) are to be located would render the visibility of the sign on that parcel significantly less than that enjoyed by similarly situated parcels. 
B.  That the request would not create a visibility hazard to adjoining parcels or the traveling public. 
C.  The height of the sign(s) would not exceed forty (40) feet. 
1.1.9.  Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Nonconforming signs shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article upon the occurrence of any of the following. 
1.  The sign is removed, dismantled, or relocated. 
2.  The sign permit has expired. 
3.  The sign has deteriorated or been damaged to an extent which reduces its value to less than fifty (50) percent of its structural replacement value. 
4.  The site is redeveloped more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the existing structures. 
B.  For nonconforming signs in non-residential districts, the sign area of any existing nonconforming sign shall reduce the unit's sign allocation by a factor of one and one-half (1½) square feet per square foot of the nonconforming sign. 
C.  Except for prohibited signs, any sign which existed and was maintained on February 22, 2005, may remain, although such sign does not conform to all of the provisions of this article. 
1.1.10.  Prohibited signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or permit the following signs: 
A.  Any sign prohibited by state or federal law. 
B.  Any sign creating a traffic hazard by obstructing vision in any sight triangle. 
C.  Any sign preventing free ingress or egress from any door, window, fire escape or other entrance or exit to any building, or any sign attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
D.  Any sign that is obscene, such as a sign depicting nudity or sexual conduct. 
E.  Any sign that emits a sound, smell, smoke, or contains flashing lights. 
F.  Any sign where any information flashes, fades, dissolves, or scrolls or signs that move or create the illusion of movement, or signs that are or appear to be animated or projected. 
G.  Any sign affixed to a tree or utility pole. 
H.  Portable signs which are manifestly designed to be transported as a trailer is transported, on its own wheels even where the wheels may be removed and the remaining chassis may be permanently attached to the ground. 
1.1.11.  Signs exempt from permits. 
The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements and also from any permit or inspection fees. All other provisions of this article shall apply. 
A.  Signs required by law (legal notices, traffic control signage, warning signs, etc.). 
B.  Holiday decorations on residential properties. 
C.  Signage authorized under a temporary event permit, provided that such signage does not exceed forty (40) square feet. Any signage over forty (40) square feet must be available under the unit's sign allocation. 
D.  Additional temporary signs during elections. One (1) additional sign six (6) square feet or less in area, or two (2) signs not exceeding four (4) square feet each, located on private property during the period from forty-five (45) days prior to, and fifteen (15) days after, any public election in Florida. 
1.  Pursuant to F.S. § 106.1435(3), no such sign shall be erected, posted, painted, tacked, nailed or otherwise displayed, placed or located within, on or above any state or county right-of-way. Upon a determination by the county that a violation of this restriction exists at one (1) or more locations, the signs may be immediately removed or be caused to be removed by the county. 
2.  Upon a determination by the county of any violation of this exemption, other than addressed above in 3., the affected candidate or sign owner, if determinable, will be contacted and advised of the violation. The candidate or sign owner will have no more than twenty-four (24) hours to remove the sign or cause the sign to comply with the requirements of this article. 
3.  The affected candidate or sign owner, if determinable, will then be notified of said removal. Any election signs removed by the county shall be stored for five (5) business days and will be returned upon payment of a removal and storage fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) per sign. Election signs not picked up within this period shall be discarded. 
E.  Vehicle signs located on a truck, bus, trailer, taxi or other vehicle which is being operated or parked on-site while in the course of business, provided: 
1.  That the primary use of the vehicle is not for the purpose of advertisement, such as a delivery vehicle. 
2.  The vehicles must have a current license plate and be in operable condition, and shall only be parked in designated parking areas as defined by this code. 
3.  The vehicle's signs must be painted on, attached by magnet, graphic wrap, window tinting, or by some other means incorporated into the vehicle in an aesthetic and safe manner. 
4.  Hanging banners, placing placards or signs inside the windows of vehicles, painting the windows of, or otherwise attaching signs to a vehicle in a manner which would endanger the driver's safety is prohibited, except where the vehicle itself is advertised for sale and the vehicle is not being driven regularly as a result. 
5.  In no case shall such vehicles be parked in rights-of-way or on publicly owned land unless in the course of business and only for the duration of the actual business transaction which necessitated the temporary placement of the vehicle at that location. 
F.  Replacement of vinyl sign covering or vinyl lettering with no structural alteration to such sign. 
(Ord. No. 2011-033, § 1, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2016-013, § 1, 2-23-16; Ord. No. 2018-003, § 1(Exh. A), 1-23-18) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 3-2. 
Sec. 3-9-85.1. - Billboards. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to regulate the billboards in a manner that improves their appearance. 
(b)  A billboard is defined as a sign over one hundred fifty (150) square feet in size, or a sign for which a special exception was approved for a class B sign before August 16, 2011, or a sign for which a state permit or license has been issued as an outdoor advertising device pursuant to F.S. ch. 479. 
(c)  All billboards existing as of January 1, 2016, are considered legal non-conforming signs. Said signs can be repaired, refurbished and replaced with a sign of the same dimension in the same location on the same parcel; such signs may be relocated to a different location on the same parcel with the zoning official's approval, and the review criteria for approval shall include, but not be limited to, public safety, visual impacts causing safety issues, environmental and regulatory location constraints, and constraints created by development or redevelopment of the parcel. In no case shall a relocated billboard be closer than two thousand (2,000) feet to an existing billboard. 
(d)  Billboards located along the interstate highway system shall meet the requirements of the Florida Department of Transportation with regard to height. In all other areas, the maximum billboard height shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2016-017, § 1(Exh. A), 3-22-16) 
Sec. 3-9-86. - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Location. Swimming pools shall be located behind the leading edge of the living area of the residence within all zoning districts which allow residential uses except AG and EM zoning districts. The minimum setback from a waterway for a pool or screen enclosure shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  Screen enclosures. Screen enclosures may be attached to the principal building but shall not be considered a part of the principal building. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-022, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15) 
Sec. 3-9-87. - Temporary uses. 
(a)  General. Certain uses are temporary in character. They vary in type and degree, as well as the length of time involved. The purpose of this section is to specify regulations applicable to certain temporary uses which, because of their impact on public infrastructure, services, and surrounding land uses, require a temporary use permit. Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations, the following regulations shall govern temporary uses. No temporary use identified herein shall be exempt from the permit requirement except in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Unless approved by the zoning official, a temporary use cannot occupy on-site parking required by these land development regulations to accommodate the ordinary parking requirements of the existing structures and uses on the property. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the associated meanings: 
Footprint shall mean the area impacted by the temporary use as measured from the outside line of all the area devoted to the use, or the drip line of a tent or cover under which the use is conducted, whichever is greater. 
Sale(s) shall be considered to include any form of commercial transaction, including fund raising activities by charitable and nonprofit organizations or school groups. 
(3)  Temporary use permits shall only be issued within the zoning districts for which the use is allowed by right or for those uses which have been permitted by special exception. For example, temporary use permits for commercial, sales, or services uses shall not be issued in residential districts. 
(4)  Temporary use permits are restricted to those activities and locations listed on the application and all temporary uses shall be confined to the dates and times specified in the permit. A separate temporary use permit is required for each temporary use. Hours of operation of temporary uses subject to this section shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(5)  No permanent or temporary lighting may be installed without an electrical permit and inspection. Temporary lighting used to illuminate the outdoor event after dusk shall be designed and arranged to reflect away from adjacent properties. 
(6)  Any temporary structures or exhibits to be constructed must be permitted in conjunction with the temporary use permit and subject to all other permit and inspection requirements of applicable county codes and state law. 
(7)  No activity, temporary tent, mechanical device, temporary sanitary facility, or animal associated with any outdoor temporary use shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned property. 
(8)  One (1) temporary sign advertising the event may be erected on the property in compliance with section 3-9-85 of the Code. 
(9)  Traffic control may be required by the county or county sheriff's department and must be arranged and paid for by the applicant. 
(10)  The applicant may be required to obtain approval from the county's fire rescue and emergency medical services (Fire/EMS) department and employ, at the applicant's cost, any mitigation measures required. 
(11)  Before any temporary use permit is issued for motor vehicle or recreational vehicle sales, the applicant must furnish the county with a copy of a current motor vehicle dealer or recreational dealer's license as required by F.S. ch. 320. 
(12)  Any Type 1 or Type 2 temporary use that will, in the determination of the zoning official, require more parking spaces than allotted on the subject property, will be required to obtain a special exception. 
(13)  The site of the temporary use must be cleared of all debris at the end of the use, and all temporary structures must be removed no later than forty-eight (48) hours after the termination of the use. A signed contract with the county's garbage collection franchisee, or a notarized letter that the property owner/applicant is responsible for the clean-up of the site, may be required as part of the application for the temporary use permit. 
(b)  Applicability. Any person or entity that desires to conduct any temporary use described in this section or determined by the zoning official to be similar in nature to those described herein, unless specifically exempted herein, shall be required to submit an application for a permit, and obtain the permit before conducting the use. A permit issued to a corporation, organization, or entity shall suffice for the persons engaging in the use on the site on behalf of the corporation, organization, or entity. The owner(s) of the property upon which the temporary use is to be conducted shall be bound by the terms of the permit, and shall signify consent to the permit by signing the permit application before it is issued. 
(1)  Examples of temporary uses regulated by this section may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Outdoor sales, parking lot sales or tent sales of merchandise, products, services or other commercial activities. 
b.  Event uses, such as fairs, carnivals, circuses, and expositions or fair associations chartered in accordance with F.S. ch. 616. 
c.  Fund raising events conducted offsite by charitable organizations, nonprofit corporations, or school groups, as well as promotions, sales and other activities by charitable organizations, nonprofit corporations, or school groups. 
d.  Seasonal and holiday related promotions and sales, including Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales, fireworks sales, and the like. 
e.  Temporary religious or revival activities. 
f.  Neighborhood and community-wide yard sales and garage sales. 
g.  Mobile food vending at temporary location. 
h.  Any other temporary use similar in nature to the ones listed above, as determined by the zoning official. 
(2)  Exemptions: The permit requirement of this section shall not apply to the following types of uses, provided that such uses shall be required to meet all other requirements of law, including but not limited to obtaining building or sign permits for temporary structures or signage: 
a.  Yard or garage sales conducted on residential parcels; provided that the use does not exceed any of the requirements of a Type 1 permit nor exceed two (2) calendar days in length. 
b.  Grand opening sales by resident merchants connected with the grand opening of a permanent use at the premises, including outside food and beverage vending; provided such use does not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days. 
c.  Temporary outdoor storage in residential districts, incidental to and exclusively in association with the construction of a principal structure and only while a valid building permit is in effect. 
d.  Such temporary uses which are extensions of a principal permitted use on-site and which are to be conducted on the premises but outside the principal structure in which those uses are permitted to occur; provided such use does not exceed five (5) consecutive calendar days. Examples of which include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Religious or revival activities conducted on-site but outside the structures of the place of worship. 
2.  Sidewalk sales, clearance, or tent sales conducted on-site by a resident merchant but outside the principle permitted structures for such use. 
3.  School events conducted on-site but outside the principle permitted structures for such use. 
(c)  Type 1 permit. 
(1)  A Type 1 permit shall be required for any temporary use occupying a footprint up to one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
(2)  No property shall have, or be a site of, more than six (6) Type 1 temporary uses in a calendar year. No Type 1 temporary use shall continue for more than five (5) consecutive calendar days; however, such uses may run concurrently (i.e. up to thirty (30) days) without incurring additional permit fees. 
(d)  Type 2 permits. 
(1)  A Type 2 permit shall be required for any temporary use occupying a footprint greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. 
(2)  No property shall have, or be a site of, more than three (3) Type 2 temporary uses in a calendar year. 
(3)  No Type 2 temporary use shall continue for more than ten (10) consecutive calendar days; however, such uses may run concurrently (i.e. up to twenty (20) days) without incurring additional permit fees. 
(4)  The final ten (10) day permits shall not run concurrently and must be spaced at least five (5) months apart. 
(e)  [Security required.] In addition to applicable permit fees, any Type 2 temporary use permit shall require the applicant to provide security in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), in the form of a surety bond, issued by a surety authorized to do business in the State of Florida, or an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a Florida financial institution, or in the form of a cash security. The security shall be in favor of the county, and benefit any person who shall suffer any loss that is provided for and recoverable under this subsection. The security shall be released ninety (90) calendar days following the conclusion of the temporary use upon the submittal of an affidavit from the applicant to the county, and the acceptance of said affidavit by the county, that all conditions of the security have been met. The conditions of such security shall be that: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply fully with all provisions of the Charlotte County Code and all other applicable county, state, or federal laws regarding the temporary use sought; and 
(2)  The applicant has, to the county's satisfaction, mitigated any damages or impacts caused or created by the temporary use. 
(f)  Application procedure and review. All applications for a temporary use permit shall be submitted to the zoning official a minimum of fifteen (15) working days prior to the proposed use. The zoning official shall grant or deny a temporary use permit or may grant a temporary use permit subject to suitable conditions, safeguards, and stipulations within seven (7) working days. If denied, the zoning official shall state the reasons in writing to the applicant. 
(g)  Application process and fees. 
(1)  Application. The applicant shall ensure that the application is accurate and complete. Any intentional misrepresentations on the application by the applicant shall be grounds for denying the permit. The application shall be made on a form acceptable to the zoning official and shall include the following: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; and 
b.  The address and legal description of the property where the temporary use will be held. If the property is not owned by the applicant, the name, address and telephone number of the owner(s) of the property and notarized authorization of all property owner(s) of record or their authorized agents, for use of the property; and 
c.  The date(s) of the event and hours of operation; and 
d.  The nature of the existing uses on the property along with the proposed temporary use; and 
e.  Required parking for existing use as well as anticipated parking needs, including overflow; and 
f.  The business tax receipt (BTR) of the applicant, if applicable; and 
g.  A site plan, drawn to scale, indicating the following: 
1.  Vehicular access onto the property; and 
2.  Location and use of any existing structures on the property; and 
3.  Location of any sanitary facilities; and 
4.  Location and amount of current and anticipated parking areas, including overflow. 
h.  For all Type 2 permits, the following additional application requirements shall be provided: 
1.  A letter from the Charlotte County Sheriff setting forth the Sheriff's determination whether any additional security or police service is necessary and the arrangement that has been made to accommodate that need; and 
2.  A letter from the Charlotte County Fire/EMS setting forth a determination on whether any additional fire or rescue service is necessary and whether an arrangement has been made to accommodate that need; and 
3.  A letter from the Charlotte County Public Works Department setting forth a determination on whether any additional roadway plans are necessary and whether an arrangement has been made to accommodate that need; 
a.  If a road closure is less than 24-hour period, the roadway level-of-service impact on the roadway cannot be quantified due to these special events. However, the event coordinator should submit the proposed maintenance of traffic plan at least thirty (30) days prior to the event so that public works staff can visit the subject location and make suggestions before issuing the public works department approval. Once public works department issues the approval, it is responsibility of the event coordinator to work with the fire/EMS and sheriff's office on the needed support from those departments to safely execute the special event. 
b.  If the special event needs a road closure for more than 24-hours (other than for an emergency event), applicant needs to attach a maintenance of traffic (MOT) plan (must be signed by a licensed engineer in the State of Florida) with the permit application for the review by the public works department at least forty-five (45) days prior to the event. This will allow the public works department to properly review the application, work closely with the appropriate agencies and issue a public service announcement (PSA) about the road closure. 
(2)  Payment of a nonrefundable application fee shall be as follows: 
a.  Type 1 Permit: .....$150.00. 
b.  Type 2 Permit: .....$300.00. 
(3)  In reviewing an application the zoning official shall take the following factors into account: 
a.  Ensure that the proposed temporary use complies with all the requirements of this section; and 
b.  Review the compatibility of any proposed use with surrounding uses, ensuring that any anticipated nuisances or incompatible features involved are suitably separated from adjacent uses; and 
c.  Ensure that the proposed temporary use will not create any vehicular parking or circulation problems, or will result in excessive vehicular traffic being generated or diverted onto residential streets. 
(Ord. No. 2014-076, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2018-031, § 1(Exh. A), 7-24-18) 
Sec. 3-9-88. - Waterfront property. 
(a)  Marine businesses and waterfront industrial uses are permitted to build up to the seawall, bulkhead or bulkhead line of any creek, canal, river, lake or other body of water, natural or artificial, in the county. 
(b)  Where the provisions of this section are deemed inconsistent with Section 3-9-50 the Manasota Key Zoning District Overlay, the provision of the latter shall apply. 
(c)  The following requirements shall apply, in addition to all other zoning requirements, to any lot, or portion of lot, located anywhere on a barrier island or within 1,200 feet of the water of Charlotte Harbor, the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek. These requirements shall not apply to properties subject to section 3-9-47, the Charlotte Harbor Community Development Code. 
(1)  No residential or commercial building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height from the lowest habitable floor for which a building permit can be issued to the highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof, or to the mid-point height between the eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs. In no event shall any area above thirty-five (35) feet be used or made available for storage or human occupancy. No boat storage facility shall exceed 48 feet in height from average natural surrounding grade. 
(2)  Buildings shall be set back from property lines abutting streets not less than the greater of the distance required by the applicable zoning district or a distance equal to the height of any setback calculation point, as such term is defined below. 
(3)  Buildings shall be set back from side property lines not abutting streets not less than the greater of the distance required by the zoning classification or a distance equal to one-half the height of any setback calculation point. No building shall be constructed or located within twenty (20) feet or a distance equal to the height of any setback calculation point, whichever is greater, of the mean high waterline of Charlotte Harbor, Lemon Bay, Gasparilla Sound, Placida Harbor, Red Fish Cove, the Myakka River, the Peace River, or Coral Creek. 
(4)  No building except single-story accessory structures shall be constructed a lesser distance from another building on the same lot than a distance equal to the height of the higher building. 
(5)  No building shall be constructed or located within fifty (50) feet or a distance equal to the height of any setback calculation point, whichever is greater, of the mean high water line of the Gulf of Mexico. No building may be constructed seaward of the coastal construction control line unless a permit has been issued by the state. 
(6)  No building shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in width or length on properties abutting the shorelines of the Gulf of Mexico, Lemon Bay, Placida Harbor, Gasparilla Sound, Charlotte Harbor, the Myakka River, the Peace River, Red Fish Cove, or Coral Creek. 
(7)  For purposes of this subsection, a setback calculation point shall be defined as any given point on the outside of a building located between the lowest minimum habitable floor elevation for which a building permit may be issued and the highest point of the roof structure. For purposes of this subsection, a height of a setback calculation point shall be calculated by measuring the vertical distance from the lowest minimum habitable floor elevation to the chosen setback calculation point. For purposes of this subsection, a setback distance based on the height of a setback calculation point (or fraction thereof) shall be calculated by measuring the horizontal distance from the chosen setback calculation point to the applicable property line. Diagram "A", attached to Ordinance No. 2002-008 and incorporated herein, shall be used for purposes of illustration, and not of limitation, of the calculation of setbacks for side property lines pursuant hereto. For purposes of determining whether setback requirements have been met under this subsection, any setback for a building must meet the applicable requirement regardless of which setback calculation point or points are used in the calculation of the setback. 
Editor's note— Diagram "A" referenced above is not set out at length in the Code, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(d)  Any existing beachfront or waterfront lot of record as of January 1, 1998, not less than fifty (50) feet wide and not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area in any district permitting multiple-family, two-family or single-family residential uses may be divided into two (2) lots, each of which shall have not less than the minimum lot area required for the district in which the lot is located. There shall be permitted one (1) driveway easement not less than ten (10) feet in width along either side lot line of the total parcel, which driveway shall connect to a public road. Side yards not less than five (5) feet from the driveway easement shall be required for all buildings. Rear yards and front yards may be perpendicular to the driveway easement as required for the district in which the property is located. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Res. No. 82-135, § 1, 9-21-82; Ord. No. 94-72, § 1, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 98-044, § 1, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2002-008, § 7, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 2005-085, § 1, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2008-027, § 1, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2016-044, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-16; Ord. No. 2017-057, § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-17) 
Cross reference— Boats, docks and waterways, Ch. 3-1; coastal construction code, § 3-2-156 et seq.; sea turtle protection, § 3-5-296 et seq. 
Sec. 3-9-89. - Visibility at road intersections. 
(a)  Clear sight triangles shall be required at the intersection of all vehicular travel ways to maintain adequate visibility, safe sight distance, and safe movement of traffic. A sight triangle shall be considered the triangular area at the intersection of two (2) vehicular travel ways where a driver's vision of oncoming traffic must remain unobstructed. Such sight triangles shall consist of two (2) thirty-foot segments (Figure 1) running at the edge of the right-of-way, which meet at the intersection and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the thirty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. For driveways, sight triangles shall consist of two (2) twenty-foot segments (Figure 2) running at the property line, and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the twenty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. There shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and six (6) feet above grade. The county engineer may approve alternative sight triangles under circumstances where the requirements of this section cannot be met. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. 

(b)  Trees shall be permitted in the clear space if foliage is cut away within the prescribed heights. Lamp posts and sign posts shall be permitted if illuminating fixtures and sign faces are not within the prescribed clear space. 
(Minutes of 12-8-81, § 8; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-023, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15) 
Cross reference— Roads and bridges, Ch. 3-6. 
Sec. 3-9-90. - Wellhead protection area. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the groundwater protection standards is to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. Therefore, standards are described in this section with the intent of protecting the groundwater supply. It is further the intent of this section to control development in and adjacent to designated wellheads to protect water supplies from potential contamination. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Cone of influence: Area within a four-hundred-foot radius of any wellhead supplying a public water system of a public or private utility company. 
(2)  Wellhead protection area: The surface and subsurface area within a one thousand five hundred (1,500) foot radius surrounding a water well supplying a public water system of a public or private utility company through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move towards and reach such well. 
(c)  Evaluation process. Prior to the issuance of any permit, an applicant for all commercial and industrial uses within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of a wellhead supplying a water system of a public or private utility company shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The applicant shall, as a prerequisite, submit an application to the utility authority operating the well or wellfield. The applicant shall describe the means to be used to prevent contamination of the well or wellfield. 
(2)  If, after meeting, the applicant and the utility authority are able to arrive at an agreement, the agreement shall be signed by both parties and a copy thereof shall be submitted to the community development department as part of the application for approval. If the application is approved by the community development department, the agreement as submitted by the applicant and the utility authority shall become a part of the approval along with any stipulations placed by the community development department. Any deviations from the terms of approval shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(3)  If the applicant and utility authority are unable to reach an agreement or if any of the parties disagree with any stipulations placed by the community development department, the applicant or utility may appeal to the board of county commissioners. The board of county commissioners shall conduct a public hearing with regard to the appeal, giving notice to both the applicant and the utility authority. In such cases, the applicant shall provide such technical information as may be requested by the board of county commissioners. 
(4)  If, through the appeals process, the application is approved by the board of county commissioners, the judgment on appeal shall become a part of the approval along with any stipulations so adopted by the board. Any deviation from the terms of approval shall be considered a violation of this Code. 
(d)  Special restrictions on development allowed within the cone of influence as defined in this section. 
(1)  Stormwater management practices shall not include drainage wells and sinkholes for stormwater disposal where recharge is into potable water aquifers. 
(2)  Where restricted development occurs in areas where existing, but abandoned wells, these wells shall be sealed and plugged in accordance to Rule 17.28, Florida Administrative Code. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  The following land uses are prohibited within the cone of influence as defined in this section: 
a.  Facilities for bulk storage, handling, or processing of materials on the Florida Substance List (F.S. § 442.103) as maintained by the Florida Department of Labor and Employment Security. 
b.  Activities that require the storage, use, handling, production or transportation of restricted substances: agricultural chemicals, petroleum products (other than to fuel pumps), hazardous/toxic wastes, industrial chemicals or medical wastes. 
c.  Mines. 
d.  Excavation of waterways or drainage facilities which intersect the water table. 
(2)  The following land uses are prohibited within a one thousand five hundred-foot radius of any wellhead supplying a public water system of a public or private utility company; 
a.  Landfills; 
b.  Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities; 
c.  Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds or similar facilities. 
(Ord. No. 98-051, § 1, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), 11-25-14) 
Sec. 3-9-91. - Accessory use—Farmers' market. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of this section is to provide a venue for local farmers and residents to primarily sell agricultural and organic products; also allowing limited arts and crafts, or other similar goods. However, no services can be sold or provided. This section provides regulations for the establishment of accessory use of farmers' market within certain zoning districts. Unless specifically stated in other sections' of this Code, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Farmers' market may be an accessory use to the following primary use, which may be located in PKR RSF, RMF, or PD zoning district: 
a.  Clubhouse. 
b.  Community garden. 
c.  Park, not-for-profit. 
d.  Place of worship. 
e.  Recreation, indoor. 
f.  Recreation, outdoor. 
(2)  A special event permit—farmers' market shall only be issued if the following requirements are met and may be renewed every six (6) months: 
a.  A layout of this accessory use must be provided, including but not limit to, placement of booths, parking area, location of restroom facilities, location of waste collection, and traffic circulation. · 
b.  Hours of operation of this accessory use shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., one (1) day per business week, Saturday, and Sunday. 
c.  One (1) temporary sign advertising the accessory use may be erected on the property in compliance with section 3-9-85 of the Code. 
d.  Traffic control may be required by the county or county sheriff's department and must be arranged and paid for by the applicant. 
e.  The applicant may be required to obtain approval from the county's fire rescue and emergency medical services (fire/EMS) department and employ, at the applicant's cost, any mitigation measures required. 
f.  The applicant shall be required to obtain an approval from the county's community service department if such accessory use occurs on the county-owned parks or recreational facilities. 
g.  The site must be cleared of all debris at the end of this accessory use, and all temporary structures must be removed no later than forty-eight (48) hours after the termination of such accessory use. A signed contract with the county's garbage collection franchisee, or a notarized letter that the property owner/applicant is responsible for the clean-up of the site, may be required as part of the application for the accessory use permit. 
h.  A copy of vendor's license is required. 
(Ord. No. 2023-016, § 1(Exh. A), 3-28-23) 
Sec. 3-9-92. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-92 as a new § 3-9-81. 
Sec. 3-9-93. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-042, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, repealed the former § 3-9-93, which pertained to property frontage and derived from minutes of Dec. 8, 1981; § 8. 
Sec. 3-9-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-94 as a new § 3-9-83. 
Sec. 3-9-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-95 as a new § 3-9-85. 
Sec. 3-9-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-96 as a new § 3-9-86. 
Sec. 3-9-97. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-97 as a new § 3-9-89. 
Sec. 3-9-98. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-98 as a new § 3-9-88. 
Sec. 3-9-99. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-041, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 25, 2014, redesignated the provisions of former § 3-9-99 as a new § 3-9-90. 
ARTICLE IV. - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3-9-100. - Buffers, landscaping, and tree requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Buffers. The purpose of the buffering provisions is to establish standards for transitional landscape buffers and screening. Certain uses of property when abutting each other may be incompatible and create conflicts that may be reduced or eliminated by transitional buffers. These standards are intended to provide a comprehensive and consistent, yet flexible framework for providing adequate transitional buffer areas and screening between abutting incompatible uses. These standards are intended to improve the appearance of the county by eliminating or minimizing potential nuisances such as noise, lighting, unsightly buildings and structures, the visibility of outdoor aspects of intensive land uses, and off-street parking and loading areas, as well as assist in soil conservation and the natural control of air and water pollution and ensure the compatibility of different land uses over time. 
(2)  Landscaping. The purpose of the landscaping provisions is to establish standards for landscaping areas associated with parking, traffic circulation, and other vehicular use. These standards are intended to provide a comprehensive and consistent, yet flexible, framework for landscaping intended to improve the appearance of the county by creating green space where development occurs, enhance soil conservation and the natural control of air, thermal, and water pollution, and ensure the compatibility of different land uses over time. 
(3)  Tree requirements. The purpose of the tree requirements provisions is to establish standards for the planting, preservation, and removal of trees. These standards are intended to provide a comprehensive and consistent, yet flexible framework for tree requirements intended to improve the appearance of the county by encouraging the proliferation of native trees and native vegetative cover, as well as relocation or replacement where necessary, and to control and eliminate invasive non-native species. Protection of trees and native vegetation is intended to promote carbon dioxide absorption, oxygen production, dust filtration; reduction of noise, wind, and glare; soil stabilization and enrichment; erosion prevention, surface drainage improvement and aquifer recharge; water pollution reduction, wildlife habitat, energy conservation, temperature moderation, the economic enhancement of improved and vacant lands; scenic beauty, quality of life, and the health, safety, welfare, and well-being of the county. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this section, or unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context, the following terms when used in this section shall have the meanings indicated as follows: 
Abutting: see "Adjacent". 
Access aisle: the principal means of vehicular ingress and egress to abutting property from a street, right-of-way, or easement. 
Active use park: all recreational parks with the exception of those used primarily as nature trails, mitigation banks, or for environmental study and interpretation. 
Adjacent: contiguous, next to. When determining whether one (1) land use or zoning district is adjacent to another, the existence of an intervening natural or manmade waterway (measured between mean high water lines or apparent high water lines), drainage facility, greenbelt, alley, or right-of-way which, alone or in combination are less than two hundred (200) feet in width, shall not be considered and the properties shall be treated as adjacent. 
Alley: any public or private right-of-way intended to be used as a secondary means of access or service to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Barrier. a durable opaque structure or hedge at least three (3) feet high used within the parking lot screening or decorative perimeter landscaping. 
Buffer: the area required to be constructed and maintained as provided in section 3-9-100.1. 
Caliper: the diameter of a tree trunk, in inches, measured at twelve (12) inches above the existing grade. 
Damaged tree: a tree that has been wounded (bark scraped or removed, canopy topped, limbs removed or shattered, roots cut or crushed) to an extent that survival is unlikely. 
Decorative perimeter landscaping: the planted space between the right-of-way and that part of the perimeter of the property not used as parking area. 
Department: the Charlotte County Community Development Department. 
Development or development activity: any non-agricultural activity that may include the following: 
a.  Clearing, scraping, mulching, grinding, or removing tree(s) or vegetation from a site. 
b.  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soils of a site. 
c.  The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; and mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance, and any use or extension of use of the land. 
Development site: that portion of a lot or parcel upon which development occurs. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH): the diameter of the tree trunk measured at fifty-four (54) inches from the existing grade. Multi-trunk trees are also measured at fifty-four (54) inches and the diameters of each trunk are cumulative. 
Drip line: the outermost perimeter of the crown of a tree as projected vertically to the ground. 
Establishment period: the time between planting and new root growth. During the establishment period, regular supplemental watering to the root zone is required. 
Florida-friendly landscaping: use of low-maintenance native plants and environmentally-sustainable landscaping practices that help to preserve Florida's natural resources and protect the environment. 
Groundcover: low growing plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity, planted in such a manner as to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
Hedge: a row of closely planted shrubs intended and designed to form an interlocking, continuous boundary or screen. 
Heritage tree: a tree and its root system within the Cypress (Taxodium spp.), Oak (Quesrcus spp.), and Pine (Pinus spp.) species which has a minimum thirty-inch trunk diameter at DBH. In the case of multi-stemmed trees where there is a union of wood above grade, the DBH shall be measured at each stem and added together to reach a minimum of a forty-five-inch diameter. 
Landscaping: grass, ground cover, mulch, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, berms, and complementary structural landscape features such as rock, foundations, sculpture, decorative walls and tree wells. 
Mulching: the cutting, grinding, bush-hogging, chipping and/or mowing of underbrush and understory vegetation, exotic vegetation, and any trees under four (4) inches DBH. Clearing, filling, soil excavation and/or removal of trees over four (4) inches DBH is not considered mulching. 
Native tree: any individual tree listed as a native species listed in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. Damaged trees do not qualify as native trees for the purposes of planting or preservation. 
Native tree replacement fund: a fund established to provide money for the purpose of planting trees on government-owned properties. 
Native vegetation: any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to the southwest region of Florida. 
Natural ground level: the elevation and grade of the parcel that existed prior to development activity. 
No tree affidavit: a signed, notarized statement by the landowner or their agent stating that no trees exist upon the site. 
Outdoor storage yard: any use of property where items such as boats, vehicles, recreational vehicles, contractor supplies, construction materials and other similar items are stored in other than a completely enclosed building. 
Parking area: the total area designated on the landscape plan for the off-street parking of vehicles, including vehicles held for sale, and includes driveways, ingress and egress lanes, specialized vehicular use areas, walkways, and aisles. 
Parking lot screening: the planted space between the right-of-way and the parking area. 
Perimeter landscape strip: the planted space between a right-of-way and subject property. The term includes parking lot screening and decorative perimeter landscaping. 
Planted tree: a tree which has been nursery grown for resale or otherwise transplanted. 
Preserved tree: a tree preserved on-site which has been barricaded or is located one hundred (100) feet or more from the farthest point of development and will count towards a development's minimum tree requirement. 
Prohibited tree: a tree of undesirable or exotic species which disrupts natural habitats or are otherwise destructive. Trees listed as Category I Invasive Species on the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's Invasive Plant List shall be prohibited. Trees listed as Category II Invasive Species are highly discouraged and cannot be counted towards a development's minimum tree requirements. Trees listed as Category I Invasive Species shall be removed during site preparation. 
Screening: fences, walls, berms, trees, shrubs, vegetation or a combination of any of these items used as visual buffering devices. 
Shrub: a woody plant of relatively low height distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk; any self-supporting, woody, evergreen and flowering perennial plant (excluding prohibited plants) characterized by multiple stems growing continuously from the base. 
Sight triangle: the triangular area at the intersection of two (2) vehicular travel ways where a driver's vision of oncoming traffic must remain unobstructed. Such sight triangles shall consist of two (2) thirty-foot segments running at the edge of the right-of-way which meet at the intersection, and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the thirty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. For driveways, sight triangles shall consist of two (2) twenty-foot segments running at the property line, and the third side is the line connecting the ends of the twenty-foot segments farthest from the intersection. There shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between a height of two (2) feet and six (6) feet above grade. The county engineer may approve alternative sight triangles under circumstances where the requirements of this section cannot be met. 
Site improvement: the structure(s), infrastructure, and utilities located on a site. 
Site plan review (SPR): Staff review of development applications, formerly known as development review committee (DRC). 
Specialized vehicular use areas: areas used for new or used motor vehicles, equipment, boats, local and inter-urban passenger bus terminals and service facilities, and motor freight terminals and loading docks. The term does not include areas set aside for access, employee parking, or areas open to public parking. 
Spiking or spurring: the use of any metal gaff device to aid in tree climbing in order to remove branches, limbs, or leaves from a tree. 
Topping: also known as "stubbing," "heading," "heading-back," "stubbing off," "tipping," "hatracking," "topping-off," "dehorning," "lopping," "roundover," "cut-over", "lollipopping;" trimming of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. This practice is strictly prohibited. 
Tree: a self-supporting woody plant, or palm with six (6) feet of clear trunk, of a species normally growing to a mature height of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
Tree, canopy: trees listed in Exhibit 8, which typically grow to a minimum of thirty (30) feet in height at maturity. 
Tree, understory/accent: trees listed in Exhibit 8, which typically do not exceed twenty (20) to thirty (30) feet in height at maturity. 
Tree points: a number calculated according to Exhibit 5: Tree Points, located in section 3-9-100.3, tree requirements. 
Vegetation: the plant life in a particular area or region. 
Vines: any of a group of woody or herbaceous plants which may climb by twining, by means of aerial rootlets, or by means of tendrils, or which may simply sprawl over the ground or other plants. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply only in the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County. For the purposes of buffering, landscaping, and tree requirements, all residential properties consisting of three (3) or more units shall be considered multi-family properties, regardless of ownership, and are subject to the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting additional trees, plant material, screening, or buffering beyond that which is required by this section or to prohibit the improvement of landscape buffers existing on the effective date of this section. 
(3)  Properties that require buffers and landscaping may not "buy out" the tree points. 
(4)  Whenever both perimeter landscaping and a buffer are required on the same location on a parcel, the more intensive requirements apply. 
(d)  Landscape plan. 
(1)  Florida-friendly landscaping design principles shall be employed in all landscape plans. 
(2)  All applicants subject to the provisions of this section shall submit a landscape plan as required by the department. The number of copies to be submitted shall be determined by the department. 
(3)  The landscape plan must be approved prior to the issuance of the associated building permit. 
(4)  For development requiring site plan approval, the landscape plan shall be submitted with or prior to the application for preliminary approval and must be approved prior to final site plan approval. 
(5)  Landscape plans shall: 
a.  Be signed and sealed by a registered landscape architect as defined by F.S. ch. 481. 
b.  Be drawn to scale, including all dimensions, distances, and acreage; 
c.  Show the square footage and location of the existing and proposed parking spaces, specialized vehicular use areas, access aisles, and driveways; 
d.  Indicate all utility and drainage easements, existing and proposed underground and overhead utility lines, buildings, structures, stormwater retention and detention areas, and similar features; 
e.  Indicate all abutting public rights-of-way; 
f.  Identify the zoning of the subject property and all adjacent parcels; 
g.  Indicate the type, location and features of the irrigation system for the required landscaping, including times, sensors, zones, and water source as applicable; 
h.  Provide an irrigation narrative on the landscape plan stating the features used to provide for the efficient use of water including: sensors which prevent watering during rain or when the ground is saturated, timers to water during optimal watering hours, and placement of vegetation in zones based on watering needs as applicable; 
i.  Identify and describe the location and characteristics of all landscape materials to be installed including the square footage and dimensions of all planters and landscape islands; 
j.  Show all landscape features, including areas of vegetation required to be preserved, in context with the location of existing and proposed buildings and other improvements on the site; 
k.  Indicate in table format the number, species, and caliper of trees to be planted, preserved, and/or removed, the gross acreage of the development site, and the square footage of paved areas; 
l.  Show all measures taken to protect landscape elements from damage caused by vehicles, including curbing, edging, wheel stops, raised planting surfaces, and other protective measures; 
m.  Indicate proposed grades if existing vegetation is to be retained within the buffer; 
n.  Show all measures to be taken to alter any greenbelts, easements, native shoreline or riparian vegetation which is being used to satisfy the requirements of this section; 
o.  Graphically show sight triangles, per section 3-9-89, visibility at road intersections. 
(6)  Due to unique circumstances, the above requirements may be modified during a landscape plan review meeting with the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(e)  Installation standards. 
(1)  All landscaping shall be installed in conformance with the landscape plan approved by the department or site plan review final approval. 
(2)  All landscaping required by this section (except sod) shall be installed by persons or entities properly licensed or qualified pursuant to article I, chapter 3-2, buildings and building regulations, of the County Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  All landscaped areas and buffers shall be protected from vehicles by curbing or wheel stops (minimum five (5) inches in height) when adjacent to pavement. In addition, the department may approve the limited use of durable barriers, such as bollards and boulders. 
(4)  Tree pruning shall be conducted according to the most recent edition of the National Arborist Association standards. 
(5)  It is unlawful to top any tree regardless of development approval date. 
(6)  Landscaping shall not interfere with or obstruct existing or proposed overhead or underground utilities. 
(7)  The property owner may choose to postpone installation of the required landscaping and/or buffering to the rainy season (June through October). In order to request this one-time option, the owner may submit a notarized affidavit to the zoning official stating that they choose to postpone the installation and understand that the landscaping and/or buffering must be installed as specified in the approved landscape plan by a specific date approved by the zoning official. No extensions shall be granted. The owner shall be responsible to ensure stabilization of the site until such time as the landscaping is installed. Site stabilization may be accomplished by utilizing seed and mulch or other alternative methods, as may be approved by the zoning official. 
(f)  Planting standards. 
(1)  All plants, except transplanted plants, shall meet or exceed the quality standards for Florida No. 1, as provided by Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Parts I and II, most recent edition, State of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee. 
(2)  Trees used for points must have a minimum diameter (as measured by caliper or forestry diameter tape) of two (2) inches measured at twelve (12) inches above the existing grade, have a minimum height of eight (8) feet at installation, and be listed on Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. Trees not on the approved tree list may be counted for points at the discretion of the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(3)  Palms used for points must have a minimum of six (6) feet of clear trunk and be listed on Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. 
(4)  Required trees not needed for tree points must: 
a.  Have a minimum diameter, measured by caliper or forestry diameter tape, of one (1) inch measured twelve (12) inches above the soil line; 
b.  Have a minimum height of six (6) feet at installation; and 
c.  Be listed on Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species, or be approved by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(5)  When more than ten (10) trees are required, a mix of species shall be planted as provided in the table below. No individual species shall comprise more than sixty (60) percent of the tree species mix. This subsection does not apply to areas of vegetation which have been preserved in the natural state. 
Exhibit 1: Tree Species Mix 

 
(6)  Shrubs and hedges for decorative perimeter and interior landscaping must be a minimum twelve (12) inches in height upon planting, be spaced eighteen (18) to thirty-six (36) inches on center determined by the type of plant used, and be of the type that reach at least twenty-four (24) inches on maturity. 
(7)  Hedges for parking lot screening and buffers must be a minimum eighteen (18) inches in height upon planting, be spaced and maintained in order to form a continuous, solid visual screen within one (1) year of planting, and be of the type that reach at least forty-eight (48) inches on maturity. 
(8)  Hedges used to replace an existing buffer wall must be at least four (4) feet tall (ten-gallon plant) at installation. 
(9)  Vines shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height at time of planting. 
(10)  Groundcover shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance, provide soil stabilization and shall be used with mulch if the ground is not completely covered by the groundcover at the time of planting. The height and size (gallon) of groundcover do not have to be designated on the landscape plan. 
(11)  Grass. 
a.  Areas to be planted with grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded using strains that are drought-resistant or require minimal watering. 
b.  Solid sod must be used in swales and other areas subject to erosion, including retention and detention ponds. Detention pond floors may be seeded. 
c.  Seeded areas must be sufficiently seeded to produce a ground cover within thirty (30) days. 
(12)  All clearing, grading, installation and site preparation shall be done in accordance with this Code. 
(13)  Existing vegetation used to meet the requirements of this section shall be protected by the measures provided in section 3-9-100.3, tree requirements. 
(14)  Where overhead power lines exist or are planned, the required canopy trees shall be replaced with trees approved for planting under power lines, as shown on Exhibit 7: Recommended Trees for Planting Under Power Lines. 
(15)  Alterations to landscaping and buffers require the prior written permission of the department. 
(16)  It is unlawful to plant any of the prohibited species identified as Category I in the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's List of Invasive Plant Species. In addition, all prohibited species must be removed during site preparation. 
(17)  For landscaping purposes, trees found in the most recent edition of the "Florida-Friendly Landscaping Guide to Plant Selection and Landscape Design," produced by the University of Florida/IFAS but not listed in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species may be permitted at the discretion of the zoning official or his/her designee. The applicant must demonstrate that the trees are appropriate for the location. These trees may be considered for tree points. 
(g)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Plantings, fences, walls, berms and irrigation systems required by this section must be maintained in good repair. Landscaped and buffer areas must be kept free of weeds, litter and debris. 
(2)  Damage to any of the landscaping or structures required by this section shall be replanted or replaced, as applicable, within ninety (90) days or one (1) growing season, whichever is sooner. Damage to a required fence or wall by a natural disaster shall be repaired within one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(3)  It is unlawful to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(4)  The department may enforce compliance with this section as provided by law and may perform reasonable inspections to insure continued compliance. 
(5)  All required landscaping and buffers may be served by an automatic irrigation system designed to eliminate the application of water to impervious areas and reduce impacts to existing native vegetation. All required landscaping and buffers shall be irrigated during the establishment period. The applicant may use a temporary irrigation system or hand watering if the applicant can demonstrate that such an approach will provide adequate water for plant survival. All alternative plans of irrigation must be approved by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(6)  Tree pruning shall be conducted according to the most recent edition of the National Arborist Association Standards. 
(h)  Florida-friendly landscaping. 
(1)  Florida-friendly landscaping is based on xeriscaping principles and has as its purpose reducing water consumption while enhancing both the beauty and hardiness of Florida landscaping. By proper design choices, a Florida-friendly landscape requires less irrigation and makes better use of the water it does receive. While there is no single fixed Florida-friendly landscape, all Florida-friendly landscapes share a set of design principles. Proposed landscape plans shall be considered based on the following "Florida-friendly" principles. 
(2)  Design principles. 
a.  Design with awareness of site conditions. Plants should be chosen that are suited to existing site conditions ("the right plant in the right place"). Soil amendments or terrain features can be added to create favorable conditions for plants that would not ordinarily thrive on the site. Native plants have a proven track record of thriving under native conditions with little or no supplemental water. The selection of drought tolerant plants will ensure a drought tolerant landscape even if severe water restrictions are imposed. 
b.  Group plants according to their water requirements. Physically concentrating high water usage plants, medium water usage plants, and low water usage plants in separate areas will allow the design of high, medium, and low water usage zones that provide the plants with the necessary amount of water, while minimizing waste. 
c.  Take steps to retain moisture in the soil. Use of organic mulches, such as pine straw, instead of inorganic materials, such as crushed rock, will promote the absorption of water by the soil as well as enhance water retention. Shade provided by established canopy trees reduces evaporation and allows a moist local environment. Avoid watering in the heat of the day to minimize evaporation. Amend fast draining sand soils with organics such as peat to enhance water retention. Careful application of irrigation with properly sized, adjusted, and timed irrigation heads will minimize water loss through evaporation, run-off, and excessive saturation. 
d.  Minimize the high maintenance costs of the landscape. Devoting less area to turf grass, using it as an accent rather than the main emphasis of the landscape, will reduce water use, maintenance costs, pesticide costs and fertilizer costs. Low maintenance trees and shrubs cost less in long term maintenance and resources as well as offering possibilities of more attractive designs. 
e.  Florida-friendly design principles shall be employed in all landscape plans. 
(i)  Completion bond. 
(1)  A certificate of occupancy (C.O.), or release from the completion of the fulfillment of the requirements of this section, may be obtained prior to the completion of the required perimeter landscaping or landscape buffer upon the posting of a cash bond in favor of the county. 
(2)  The bond shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the value of the required landscaping and buffer which remains to be completed. 
(3)  The bond will be forfeited to the county if the remaining required landscaping is not completed within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the C.O. or release. 
(4)  The department director may, upon consideration of site-specific or other extraordinary circumstances, extend the period of time for completion of the landscaping for not more than an additional one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(5)  Those property owners who have chosen to postpone the installation of their required landscaping and/or buffering to the rainy season in accordance with section 3-9-100(e)(7) shall be exempt from this section of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-055, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15) 
Sec. 3-9-100.1. - Buffers. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all new development. 
(2)  Whenever additions to existing buildings, structures, or parking are constructed, the requirements of this section apply if: 
a.  The square footage of the addition(s) exceeds fifty (50) percent of the square footage of the existing improvement(s), or 
b.  The estimated cost of the addition(s) or improvement(s) exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised value of the existing improvement(s). 
c.  Whenever the application of the strict requirements of this section to the renovation, restoration, reuse, or rehabilitation of property developed prior to June 20, 2001, will result in the loss of other site improvements required by this Code, the zoning official or his/her designee may approve a site-specific buffer plan which best meets the purpose and intent of these buffer requirements. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Private recreational facilities constructed for use by the residents of a development when the facility is located in the interior of the development. 
(2)  Buildings and structures for emergency and essential services, as determined by the board of county commissioners (BCC) its discretion. 
(3)  Property which is separated from the adjacent property by more than two hundred (200) feet of waterway, right-of-way, greenbelt, drainage facility, or combination thereof, is exempt from the required zoning buffer, but not from perimeter landscape strips, as applicable. 
(c)  Types of buffering. 
(1)  The minimum buffer requirements pursuant to this section shall be as provided in Exhibit 3: Buffer Type Illustrations, unless otherwise specifically provided in this section. 
(2)  Greenbelts, easements, native shoreline and riparian vegetation may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section if: 
a.  The plant materials and density comply or can be altered to comply with the requirements of this section; 
b.  The greenbelt, easement, native shoreline or riparian vegetation can be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section; and 
c.  The applicant provides written authorization from all persons or entities having an ownership interest in the greenbelt, easement, native shoreline or riparian vegetation for the use and maintenance of the area as a buffer. 
(3)  On-site plantings outside the required buffer area may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section to the extent that the plantings are located within the distance of three (3) times the width of the required buffer measured from the closest edge of a required buffer location. 
(4)  Mangroves growing below the mean high water line, or waterward of a seawall or bulkhead, may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section, provided: 
a.  Such mangroves are under the ownership and control of the owner of the site being developed, or 
b.  The applicant has provided to the department the written consent of the owner of the site on which the mangroves are located, or authorized representative thereof, to the use of the mangroves as an off-site buffer. 
c.  The canopies of the mangrove trees extend to no less than six (6) feet above the final graded elevation of the portion of the property on which the buffer is established. 
(d)  Special provisions. 
(1)  The perimeter of all outdoor storage yards shall be buffered with a Type D buffer regardless of the width of any adjacent road or easement. These buffer requirements may be reduced to Type B on interior lot lines abutting IG or II zoning districts. 
(2)  The buffering required by this section shall be included in all planned developments (PD), as determined as part of the PD rezoning process. 
(3)  The requirements of this section shall apply to property being used under the authority of a special exception. The type of buffering required will be established as a part of the special exception process. 
(4)  Land uses for which a buffer type is not specifically provided for in this section shall be buffered at the level most likely to achieve the stated purpose of this division at the discretion of the zoning official or his/her designee. 
(e)  Installation standards. 
(1)  Buffers areas shall be placed adjacent to the lot lines except: 
a.  Where necessary to avoid obstructions within the sight triangle; 
b.  At approved ingress and egress lanes; 
c.  Where easements or covenants regarding the use of the land prohibit such placement; or 
d.  Where natural features of the land prevent such placement. 
(2)  Buffer areas may not be located on any portion of an existing or dedicated right-of-way or roadway easement. 
(3)  No development or impervious surface is permitted within the required buffer. 
(4)  No grading, development, or land-disturbing activities are permitted within the buffer unless approved by the department. 
(5)  Stormwater detention or treatment areas may not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the width of the buffer; provided however that this restriction does not apply to parcels less than or equal to ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(6)  Buffer areas may be used for passive recreation, sitting areas, and pedestrian and bicycle paths, provided, in the case of paths, that the width of the buffer is increased by the width of the path wherever the path is located and all other requirements of this section are met. 
(7)  Buffer areas may be used for utility placement but only if: 
a.  No canopy tree will be displaced or damaged by the installation or maintenance of the utility; and 
b.  The applicant has produced written evidence that the utility has granted authority for such use; 
(8)  Buffers must be maintained in compliance with this section. 
(9)  Plants and trees shall be installed in a uniform manner as depicted on the approved landscape plan. 
(10)  Retaining existing native trees and vegetation within a buffer is encouraged unless a grade change exceeding six (6) inches is required. 
(11)  All prohibited plant species identified as category I invasive species in the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's List of Invasive Plant Species must be removed from the developed site during development or phase thereof. 
(12)  Existing native trees listed in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species, may be used to meet the buffer plant material requirements if properly preserved as provided in section 3-9-100.3, tree requirements. 
(13)  Berms must be graded to appear smooth, rounded and natural; slopes must not exceed a slope ratio of 3:1. 
(14)  Whenever a berm wall is required, the wall shall be located between the berm and the higher intensity use. Berm walls required by this section are exempt from zoning setbacks requirements. 
(15)  The finished side of the fence or wall required by this section, and at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required plant material, shall face the property zoned or used for less intensive uses. 
(16)  Fences and walls used to meet buffering requirements shall be: 
a.  A minimum of six (6) feet in height from finished grade; 
b.  Opaque; 
c.  Decorative; and 
d.  Be made of one (1) of the following: concrete aggregate, stucco finish (either painted or colored), brick, stone, wood, vinyl, or plastic. 
(17)  For the purpose of use within required buffers, chain link fences and walls constructed of bare concrete block, even if painted, are prohibited. 
(18)  Gates are allowed in fences and walls, provided such gates are opaque and remain closed when not in use. 
(19)  Walls and fences may be constructed in separate segments provided all other provisions of this section are met. 
(20)  In order to reduce a "walled in" effect, a hedge planted and maintained at a minimum of four (4) feet in height may be substituted for a required fence or wall when the required buffer faces a road. 
Exhibit 2: Table of Minimum Buffer Requirements 

 
Exhibit 3: Buffer Type Illustrations  



Exhibit 4: Berms, Berm Walls, and Fences Illustrations  
(Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-055, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15) 
Sec. 3-9-100.2. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The requirements of this section shall apply whenever parking area is constructed. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
a.  Paved areas used for parking and other vehicular uses that serve single-family residences or two-family residences, or 
b.  Paved areas associated with permitted principal uses within the agricultural and excavation and mining zoning districts (AG and EM). 
(3)  The following improvements do not cause the property to be subject to the requirements of this section: 
a.  Overflow grass parking. 
b.  Existing parking areas that are re-striped. 
c.  Buildings and structures for emergency and essential services as determined by the BCC at its discretion. 
(4)  Parking lot screening shall be required whenever there is construction of paved parking areas abutting a public right-of-way. 
a.  Paved parking areas are those areas used for parking, storage or display of vehicles, boats, construction equipment, or similar manufactured items, including those accessory areas, adjacent to parking, used for ingress, egress or traverse. 
b.  A parking area is considered paved if it has been improved from the natural state by any hard surface including asphalt, concrete, gravel, marl, or shell. 
c.  Existing parking areas that are scarified must comply with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Decorative perimeter landscaping shall be required wherever property improved by other than a paved parking areas abuts the public right-of-way. 
(6)  Perimeter landscape strips and interior landscape areas required by this section shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other approved permeable landscaping treatment in accordance with Florida-friendly design principles, provided: 
a.  Pavement and sand are not considered approved landscape material. 
b.  The use of sand, rock, and aggregate are appropriate only as part of a decorative design and is subject to approval by the department. 
c.  The use of non-decorative rock and aggregate for drainage purposes is permitted, but does not count toward meeting the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Perimeter landscaping. 
(1)  In general. 
a.  Areas abutting public rights-of-way shall be screened from public rights-of-way by a perimeter landscape strip at least eight (8) feet in width. 
b.  For parcels smaller than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the perimeter landscape strip width may be reduced to five (5) feet provided there is a minimum of three (3) feet of pervious surface adjacent to the perimeter landscape strip. 
c.  For the purposes of this section, ingress and egress lanes act to separate perimeter landscape strips, and the width of ingress and egress lanes is excluded when determining the length of perimeter landscape strips. 
d.  One (1) tree is required for every thirty-five (35) feet, or fraction thereof, of perimeter landscape strip. Trees within a section of perimeter landscape strip may be grouped, but the distance between trees in a section shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Parking lot screening. 
a.  In addition to the requirements of section 3-9-100.2(a), wherever parking areas abut public rights-of-way, a hedge or durable non-vegetative barrier, or combination thereof, at least three (3) feet in height shall be placed along the entire length of the perimeter landscape strip, except within sight triangles. 
b.  Earthen berms may be used as non-vegetative barriers but shall not exceed a slope ratio of 3:1 (horizontal to vertical) and shall be stabilized with sold, landscaping, or other aesthetic treatment. 
c.  Whenever non-vegetative barriers are employed, a minimum of one (1) shrub or vine shall be planted for every eight (8) linear feet, or fraction thereof. Plantings may be distributed evenly or in clusters. 
d.  Shrubs must be a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height. 
e.  Vines shall be planted along the right-of-way side of the non-vegetative barrier unless of sufficient height at the time of planting to be visible from the right-of-way over the top of the non-vegetative barrier. 
(3)  Decorative perimeter landscaping. In addition to the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, wherever improvements other than paved parking areas abut the public right-of-way, one (1) shrub or vine at least twelve (12) inches in height shall be planted in the perimeter landscape strip for every eight (8) linear feet, or fraction thereof. 
(c)  Interior parking lot landscaping. 
(1)  The purpose of interior landscaping is to lessen the undesired effects of large areas of impervious surface and pavement. 
(2)  All off-street parking lots in excess of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or five (5) spaces, whichever is less, shall comply with the following: 
a.  All rows of parking shall have a terminal island placed at each end with a minimum of one (1) tree and shall be fully planted with shrubs, and groundcover. Each island shall be at least eight (8) feet wide as measured from back of curb to back of curb. Larger islands are recommended, especially where canopy trees are provided. 
b.  The length of each planter island shall be the length of a parking space for single-row parking, or the length of two (2) car spaces for double-row parking. In the case of parallel parking, the length of a planter island shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
c.  No row of parking spaces shall contain more than ten (10) spaces uninterrupted by a required landscape island. No row of parallel parking shall contain more than five (5) spaces uninterrupted by a required landscape island. 
d.  Each double-row terminal island shall include at least two (2) trees in addition to being fully planted with shrubs and groundcover. 
e.  Planter islands shall be landscaped so as not to obstruct traffic sight lines. Shrubs shall be maintained at a height of twenty-four (24) inches; trees shall have a minimum of six (6) feet of clear trunk, as measured from the ground up. 
f.  Configurations of planter islands not in strict conformity with this section may be approved if such configuration is necessary to preserve existing trees as determined by the zoning official or his/her designee. 
g.  Sod is not permitted within any required landscape islands. 
(3)  Specialized vehicular use areas, as defined in this section, are exempt from required parking islands. 
(Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-055, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15) 
Sec. 3-9-100.3. - Tree requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The terms of this section shall apply to any native or non-native tree, as listed in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. This section shall also apply to the tree removal, protection, and tree planting requirements of a development. 
(1)  On-site inspection for conformance with the requirements of this section shall be conducted by the Charlotte County Code Compliance Division (or its equivalent successor) in order to receive a certificate of occupancy (C.O.). 
a.  The BCC shall establish, by resolution, appropriate fees to defray the cost of enforcing the provisions of this section. 
b.  All trees preserved or planted per this section must remain preserved in perpetuity. 
c.  If the requirements of this section are not met at the time of final inspection, a reinspection fee, in an amount established by resolution, will be assessed for any additional inspections. 
d.  Any tree regulated by this section that dies, sustains major damage, or contracts a disease, such that its restoration to a sound condition is impractical, must be replaced by a tree of comparable size and type or a combination of trees having an equal number of tree points. Compliance may be determined by a follow-up inspection that may occur at the discretion of the county. 
e.  Any tree which is required as a replacement to the original C.O. tree is also subject to a follow-up inspection, following its installation. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Properties which meet all of the following criteria: 
a.  The primary principal use is bona fide agriculture; 
b.  The property is zoned for agriculture; 
c.  The future land use map (FLUM) designation is agriculture; and 
d.  The property is not within a development of regional impact (DRI). 
(2)  Developments which received final site plan approval or building permits prior to September 15, 1992, excluding the provisions of section 3-9-100.3(e), heritage trees. 
(3)  Developments, alterations, or additions of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less. 
(4)  Interior remodeling or modifications. 
(5)  Commercial plant and tree nurseries, where plants and trees are grown and/or sold for horticultural purposes. 
(6)  Removal of trees as part of an approved management activity within a preserve or resource conservation area. 
(7)  Cemeteries. 
(c)  Minimum tree requirements. 
(1)  For all development regulated by this section, tree points must be preserved or planted according to Exhibit 6: Tree Points for Development Types. A list of trees acceptable for the purpose of this section is provided in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. 
(2)  For all landscaping purposes, trees found in the most recent edition of the "Florida-Friendly Landscaping Guide to Plant Selection and Landscape Design," produced by the University of Florida/IFAS, but not listed in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species may be permitted at the discretion of the zoning official or his/her designee. The applicant must demonstrate that the tree is appropriate for the location. These trees may be considered for tree points. 
Exhibit 5: Tree Points 

 
*  From Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. 
**  Add 0.5 points for every inch thereafter (except in the case of Palms, Wax Myrtles, and Palmetto). 
Exhibit 6: Tree Points for Development Types 

 
*  Palms shall not be considered canopy trees for the purpose of satisfying the tree requirements for manufactured home parks within a manufactured home park (MHP) zoning district. 
*  Manufactured home parks in MHP zoning district may not "buy out" tree points. 
(3)  In order to count toward the minimum tree point requirement, a preserved or planted tree must have a minimum height of eight (8) feet measured from the existing grade to the highest point of the foliage and a minimum caliper of two (2) inches measured twelve (12) inches above the existing grade. 
a.  Trees preserved within the minimum required rear and side yard setbacks of the development site may be counted toward the tree point requirement. Trees may be planted anywhere within the development site, including the minimum required rear and side yard setbacks, except where otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this section. A single phase of phased development shall be considered a development site and all the points shall be calculated within that phase. 
b.  Trees preserved or planted within easements may be counted toward the tree point requirement. 
1.  If a preserved tree located within an easement is removed during the lawful development activity within the easement for which the easement was intended, this loss shall not be held against the landowner or against the conditions of this section, and no action shall be taken against the rightful user of the easement for which it was intended. 
2.  A list of acceptable trees for tree planting in utility easements near power lines is set forth below in Exhibit 7: Recommended Trees for Planting under Power Lines. 
Exhibit 7: Recommended Trees for Planting Under Power Lines 

 
3.  Trees planted or preserved within easements shall not interfere, at or before maturity, with power, cable television, or telephone lines, sewer or water pipes, or any other existing or proposed overhead or underground utility service. Location of underground utility lines shall be determined prior to easement planting. 
4.  In the event that a tree is planted within an easement and is removed during lawful development activity within the easement for which the easement was intended, this loss shall be the responsibility of the property owner, the tree shall be replaced, and no action shall be taken against the rightful user of the easement for which it was intended. 
c.  Trees planted to meet the minimum tree point requirements of this section may not be planted within county rights-of-way. 
(4)  While all preserved native palms may be counted toward a development's tree point requirement, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required tree points may be obtained from planted native or non-native palms. 
(5)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the required tree points may be obtained from approved non-native trees except that non-native palms shall not count for more than twenty-five (25) percent of total required points per section 3-9-100.3(c)(4). 
(6)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required tree points may be obtained from approved Wax Myrtle which has been planted or preserved. 
(7)  No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required tree points may be obtained from the approved square footage of preserved Palmetto. 
(8)  Replacement trees must carry plastic tags identifying their species. These tags must be retained until the C.O. is granted. 
(d)  Tree removal. 
(1)  Prior to the removal of any tree with a caliper four (4) inches or greater, or palm with a clear trunk six (6) feet or greater, the landowner or his/her agent must receive a tree removal authorization signed by an authorized county official. 
(2)  All applicants proposing development must submit the following to the Department at the time of application for building permits and prior to any development activity: 
a.  A tree survey consisting of a scaled drawing indicating: 
1.  Development site boundaries. 
2.  Location of all individual trees, other than prohibited species, which have a caliper four (4) inches or greater; the trees' common names; and their approximate calipers measured with a caliper or forestry diameter tape twelve (12) inches from existing grade. 
3.  A scaled drawing superimposed on the tree inventory illustrating all proposed and existing improvements; which trees are to be removed; and which trees are to be preserved. 
b.  In cases where a tree survey is submitted for a single-family property and is found to be incomplete or incorrect, the county reserves the right to require a signed and sealed tree survey. 
c.  For development requiring site plan review committee approval, tree surveys must be completed by a certified arborist or signed and sealed by registered landscape architect, professional engineer, surveyor, or similar professional. 
d.  Proof that removal of trees is consistent with tree removal criteria in section 3-9-100.3(g) or tree removal authorization exemptions in section 3-9-100.3(h). If it is determined that the trees to be removed are exempt from removal fees, a memorandum of fee exemption will be issued as proof of compliance. Environmental review fees apply if a site inspection is conducted by county staff, if applicable. 
e.  A fee shall be charged for each caliper inch of tree which has been granted tree removal authorization. These fees shall be placed into the native tree replacement fund pursuant to section 3-9-100.3(j). 
(3)  In the event that no trees exist on the development site, the applicant shall not be required to provide the tree inventory. In lieu of this requirement the applicant shall submit a notarized "no tree affidavit." 
(4)  Absolutely no speculative clearing is allowed. Applicant must have either a building permit or final site plan approval prior to county staff authorizing any clearing or tree removal activities. 
(5)  For development requiring site plan review committee approval, all documentation listed above and a landscape plan illustrating the incorporation of both preserved and planted trees, as applicable, into the proposed development must be submitted at the time of preliminary plan submittal. 
(6)  Tree sampling. 
a.  For all properties greater than one hundred (100) acres in gross size, an applicant may use a tree sampling option. The sampling survey and report shall be performed by a certified arborist, a registered landscape architect, surveyor, or similar professional. 
i.  The sampling areas combined shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the entirety of the development site. 
ii.  Each sampling site shall be no less than one (1) acre in size. 
iii.  A minimum of three (3) sampling areas are required. Sites with varying degrees of tree coverage may require additional sampling areas. 
A.  Sampling areas will be determined by the planning and zoning official. Sampling areas shall be representative of tree coverage categories on the site (e.g., low, medium, high density tree coverage). The site will then be delineated to show the total acreages of each category of tree coverage. 
B.  Tree sampling surveys and reports must be submitted and approved as part of the preliminary site plan review process. 
C.  For planned developments (PDs), tree sampling surveys and reports must be submitted and approved as part of the PD final detail site plan review process. 
iv.  All trees with a caliper inch measurement of four (4) inches or greater and all palms with a clear trunk of six (6) feet or greater shall be included in the sampling for each sampling site. 
v.  The sampling survey shall be accompanied by a report. At a minimum, the report shall include: 
A.  A description of the site characteristics. 
B.  A description of the method and procedure(s) employed to sample the site. 
C.  A description of tree species found on site. This section of the report shall include a discussion of any invasive/exotic species and heritage trees on site, as applicable. 
D.  A table for each sampling site providing the species and caliper inch measurement of all trees found within the sampling site. 
E.  A table providing the caliper inch calculations for each tree coverage category. This table shall include the total acreage of each category, the caliper inches per acre, and total caliper inch calculations. 
F.  A table providing the number and types of trees, and the trees' common names per acre, for each tree coverage category (e.g., pines per acre, oaks per acre). 
G.  A table providing the number and types of trees for each tree coverage category with total calculations for the entire site. 
vi.  Sites utilizing tree sampling shall not be exempt from any tree removal fees, including heritage tree removal fees. 
vii.  If trees are to be preserved on site and counted for required tree points, these areas shall be identified on the sampling survey as such, and separate calculations provided. 
viii.  Tree sampling does not authorize removal of any trees on a site. Tree removal shall only be authorized after approval of the tree removal permit. Tree removal permits may only be issued after receiving final site plan review approval or as part of a building permit. 
ix.  Nothing contained above shall relieve the county of the ability to ask for further information relating to tree sizes and numbers, or further sampling in coordination with the applicant. In cases where a tree sampling survey is found to be incomplete or incorrect, the county reserves the right to require a full tree survey of the property. 
(e)  Heritage trees. No person shall cut down, remove, relocate, or in any way damage a heritage tree. These trees shall be protected without regard to their location or the date of final development approval. 
(1)  The zoning official or his/her designee shall exempt a heritage tree from the terms and provisions of this section if: 
a.  The tree is in advanced stages of decline. Staff reserves the right to request a determination from a certified arborist; 
b.  The tree is located where a structure or improvement allowed as a permitted principal use under zoning regulations is to be located and the applicant has made every effort to accommodate the heritage tree within the design of the structure or improvement. It is the intent of this provision that a permit shall be granted for the removal of a heritage tree only after the applicant has demonstrated an effort to design and locate the proposed structure or improvements to prevent the removal a heritage trees consistent with the permitted use of the property; 
c.  The tree is causing substantial structural or infrastructural damage, to be determined by a qualified engineer of record. The applicant must demonstrate that alternative remedies such as root barriers or trimming are not feasible. 
(2)  All heritage trees shall be replaced on a DBH inch for DBH inch basis. When the zoning official or his/her designee determines that site-specific conditions limit or prevent the replacement of trees on site, the applicant shall pay one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per DBH inch not replanted to the native tree replacement fund. 
(3)  Encroachment under a heritage tree will be allowed only to the extent provided by this section. 
(4)  Heritage trees on existing developed properties may be exempt from the DBH inch replacement and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per DBH inch fee requirements if the tree is in advanced stages of decline as determined by a certified arborist, or is causing significant structural damage as determined by a professional engineer, or as approved for removal under subsection b above. 
(f)  Tree preservation and protection. 
(1)  Where healthy trees of appropriate location, species, and quality exist on-site prior to development, efforts shall be made to preserve such trees permanently at natural grade in accordance with the following: 
a.  Prior to the site clearing phase of development, the trees to be preserved shall be protected by the construction of barriers. 
b.  The barriers shall be constructed of wooden (or equivalent) posts at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches, and shall be implanted in the ground deep enough to be stable. The barriers shall be visible, with at least three (3) feet showing above the ground. The protective posts shall be placed not more than six (6) feet apart and shall be linked together using lumber; erosion fabric; net or plastic fence material, or snow fencing. Stakes strung with line or flagging shall not be considered a protective barrier. 
c.  Barriers shall be placed at least six (6) feet from the trunk of any protected palm. 
d.  For tree species other than palms, barriers will be placed at the drip line, except as allowed in an area of encroachment as defined in section 3-9-100.3(f). 
e.  In situations where Palmetto (Serenoa repens) occurs as a dense understory to existing oaks, pines, or palms, the existing Palmetto may be used as a living barricade for tree preservation, provided such Palmettos are retained to the dripline of the proposed preserved tree throughout construction. If the minimum square footage (25 sq. ft.) of Palmetto is then retained after construction, such Palmetto may qualify for additional tree points in accordance with section 3-9-100.3(c). 
f.  Where clusters of trees or large areas are to be protected, the area may be designated by barriers placed at the drip line from the outermost trees of the cluster or within the allowable area of encroachment. If the outermost trees are palms, the barrier shall be placed at least six (6) feet from the trunks of the outermost palm. 
g.  Barriers will remain in place until all construction activity, except landscaping, within the protected areas is complete. 
h.  Trees not protected in the manner defined by this section throughout the construction period will not be considered preserved for purposes of this section, except for trees so located that they are one hundred (100) feet or more from the farthest point of development activity. 
i.  No equipment, vehicles, construction materials, temporary structures or buildings, machinery, fill soil, sod, debris, fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement, grout, or construction chemical of any kind will be placed, allowed to enter, or be stored within the protective barriers established around protected trees or protected areas. 
j.  All anchor straps and wood shall be removed after a minimum of six (6) months and a maximum of one (1) year period as long as the tree has been properly established. 
k.  Temporary sanitation facilities shall not be located within the tree protection areas. 
l.  No damaging attachment, wires (other than support wires for a tree), signs or permits shall be fastened to any tree protected by this section. 
(2)  In the event that the preservation techniques referenced in this section are deemed impracticable, trees and tree roots may be encroached upon provided that such encroachment complies with the following conditions: 
a.  No more than one-half (½) of the radius of the tree canopy is impacted. This encroachment shall occur on no more than one (1) side of the tree. 
b.  No more than one-third (⅓) of all tree roots found at the outermost limits of the tree's drip line are encroached upon. 
c.  The remaining area of the tree's roots shall be protected by barriers at the drip line throughout construction and shall remain in preconstruction condition during and after construction. 
d.  Paved areas of allowable encroachment shall use techniques that provide for aeration and irrigation of the root system. These techniques include: 
1.  Substituting gravel or pebbles for typical fill soils; and 
2.  Using pervious or porous paving materials in the areas of encroachment. 
e.  Supplemental irrigation shall be provided throughout construction in order to mitigate tree stress induced by this encroachment. 
(3)  If the development utilizes construction techniques such as pilings or piers, which will not impact tree root systems, the area of allowable encroachment may be exceeded. 
(4)  In no event shall a damaged tree, a dead tree, a tree not protected in accordance with the provisions of this section, or a tree not included in Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species, be counted as a preserved or planted tree for purposes of this section. 
(5)  On-site inspection for conformance with the provisions of this section shall be conducted by the code compliance division inspectors or authorized county official at any time during a site's development. 
(g)  Criteria for issuance of tree removal authorization. 
(1)  Tree removal authorization shall be granted only when an authorized county official has determined that the removal is consistent with one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Trees pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or cause disruption to public utility services. 
b.  Trees pose a safety hazard to buildings or structures which cannot be remedied by trimming. 
c.  Trees completely prevent access or cross access to a lot or parcel. 
d.  Trees prevent development or physical use. It is the intent of this provision that a permit shall be granted for the removal of any tree when the applicant has demonstrated an effort to design or locate a proposed site improvements so as to minimize the removal of trees. 
e.  Diseased trees or trees so weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury so as to pose a danger to persons, property, improvements, or other trees. 
f.  In RE or AG zoned districts when required tree points are maintained. If tree points are maintained, excess trees may be removed without the caliper inch fee, but will still require tree removal authorization. Heritage trees shall not be removed unless they meet the criteria for removal in this chapter. 
(2)  Authorization to remove a tree(s), when granted, shall be confined to the tree(s) specifically identified for removal as permitted. Removal of a tree(s) must be performed within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the tree removal authorization or during the development activity for which final SPR approval was granted. Speculative clearing is not permitted. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the removal of any trees by the applicant. 
(h)  Tree removal authorization; exemptions. 
(1)  The following categories shall be considered exempt from tree removal authorization requirements and per caliper inch fees as provided in this section: 
a.  Removal of any tree(s) with less than a four-inch caliper and any palm with less than six (6) feet of clear trunk. 
b.  Dead trees. 
c.  Trees listed as Category I or II on the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's Invasive Plant List. 
d.  The removal of trees located within the footprint and within six (6) feet of the footprint of any building construction at the time of construction. 
e.  Lawful development activities within existing (existing prior to effective date) utility, drainage, and road rights-of-way or easements, for the purposes for which they were reserved, and the expansions of existing (existing prior to effective date) road easements, including associated retention ponds. 
f.  The trimming, cutting, or other alteration to any existing tree, provided such activities are consistent with sound horticultural practices. 
g.  In the event of an emergency such as the approach and imminent landing of a hurricane, windstorms, flood, freezes, fire, or other disasters, the county administrator or his/her designee retains the authority to temporarily waive the requirements of this section. 
(i)  Tree replacement. Qualifying, existing trees shall be preserved whenever feasible in order to meet the tree point requirements of this section. Whenever the removal of trees on a development site would result in failure to meet the minimum tree point standards, approved replacement trees shall be planted in sufficient number and size to meet these standards, and the following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  All trees selected to meet the requirements of this section shall be chosen from Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species. Other tree species, except prohibited species, may be included on the development site, but shall not be counted toward meeting the requirements of this section. Trees planted in compliance with section 3-9-100.1, buffers, or section 3-9-100.2, landscaping, may be used to help satisfy the requirements of this section, provided they meet the criteria set forth in this section. 
(2)  All trees used in conformance of this section shall meet or exceed the standards for Florida No. 1 as provided by Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Part II, Palms and Trees; most recent edition; State of Florida, Department of Agriculture, Tallahassee. 
(3)  The property owner(s) shall be responsible for installing all trees in a sound, professional manner and in accordance with accepted good horticultural techniques, including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Grow bags and containers shall be completely removed from the root ball prior to planting. 
b.  Burlap shall be sliced in both directions on the sides of the root ball and removed from the top one-third (⅓) of the root ball. 
c.  All twine or wire shall be cut off from around the trunk at the top of the root ball. 
d.  Trees shall be mulched to a minimum depth of two (2) inches and a maximum depth of four (4) inches with organic mulch at least to the perimeter of the root ball. 
e.  The owner(s) or their agent(s) shall provide sufficient soil and water to sustain healthy growth of all trees. 
(4)  Trees with a caliper of four (4) inches or more shall be anchored for a period of at least one (1) year. Single staking of trees shall be prohibited. 
(5)  In the event the property owner is not residing in Charlotte County at the time of C.O. issuance, and (i) chooses to install his/her own trees; or (ii) is not available to care for the newly planted trees, the property owner may, upon written request, post a security deposit either as cash or certified check that is equivalent to the established dollar amount for the development's required number of tree points (i.e., the "buy-out" fee). This cash security deposit is valid for ninety (90) days from the issuance of the C.O. 
a.  Upon inspection and written approval from the code compliance inspector that all tree installation has been met within the allotted ninety-day period, the posted security deposit will be refunded within five (5) working days. 
b.  Should the property owner fail to properly install the required number of tree points in the allotted time, the money will be placed into the native tree replacement fund without further refund. 
(j)  Native tree replacement fund. 
(1)  The public works department is hereby authorized and directed to administer a native tree replacement fund which consists of monies collected as payment for tree removal authorization and in lieu of planting or preserving trees on developed properties. The community development department is hereby authorized and directed to collect the monies for payment of the native tree replacement fund. Thus, an applicant shall pay to the department a sum determined by multiplying the number of required tree points which they wish to be excused from preserving or planting on a development site times the native tree replacement fee, said fee to be established by resolution of the BCC. 
a.  The department shall keep records of the monies received pursuant to this section. 
b.  The board shall establish, by resolution, a program administered by the public works department which shall apply monies received to the planting of native trees, native shrubs, mulch, installation, design, and irrigation on lands or easements of the county or other government-owned lands. Non-substantive amendments may be made from time to time without action by the BCC as deemed necessary for the administration of the program. 
(k)  Slope variance. Notwithstanding other county requirements, and in order to facilitate the policy that preservation is more desirable than replacement, if preservation cannot be accomplished in conjunction with a 6:1 slope but can be accomplished by using a 4:1 slope, then such is authorized. The construction of tree wells and the use of stemwall construction may be used and is encouraged whenever possible to prevent changes in the grade within the drip line of protected trees. 
(l)  Water retention/recharge areas. As an additional alternative to present slope requirements, when the use of water retention/recharge areas can be accomplished on-site and is beneficial to trees to be preserved, such retention/recharge areas may be used. 
(m)  Prohibited trees. The planting of any prohibited species of tree, as identified in the most recent edition of the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's Invasive Plant List as a Category I Invasive Species, shall be strictly prohibited. The planting of trees identified as a Category II Invasive Species is strongly discouraged. 
(n)  Banyan trees (ficus benghalensis). The planting of banyan trees within fifty (50) feet of any structure or right-of-way is prohibited. 
(o)  Prohibited practices. The following practices or procedures shall be considered unlawful in the county, except where exempted: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful practice for any person, firm or agency to "top" or allow to be "topped", or severely prune, so as to appear stunted, any tree. 
a.  All tree pruning shall be conducted according to the most recent edition of the National Arborist Association standards, which are hereby incorporated by this reference. 
b.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility lines or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or agency to climb any living tree, using the practice known as "spiking" or "spurring". The practice of "spurring" or "spiking" shall be allowed only to achieve the total removal of a tree for reasons authorized by this section. 
(p)  Voluntary planting. The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to restrict, regulate, or limit the voluntary planting of any tree, other than prohibited trees, in the county. The provisions of this section govern only the planting of trees which are required to be planted or retained as required by this section. 
(q)  Variance, appeal and penalty. 
(1)  The board of zoning appeals (BZA) may, upon appropriate application in writing, vary or waive the terms and provisions of this section due to unreasonable hardship in specific cases. The criteria for a variance are as follows: 
a.  Unique or peculiar conditions or circumstances apply to the property. 
b.  The strict literal enforcement of the terms of this regulation would result in demonstrable and undue hardship or deprive the property owners of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners. 
c.  The requested variance is the minimum modification of these regulations. 
d.  The requested variance is compatible with all other county regulations. 
(2)  The preservation of any approved tree over eighteen (18) inches DBH may be considered by the appropriate county official as the basis for the granting of a variance from the literal application of the provisions of this section and other county regulations. 
(3)  Any party aggrieved by the administrative interpretation or enforcement of this section may appeal to the BZA pursuant to section 3-9-6 of the Charlotte County Code. 
(4)  Penalties for violation. 
a.  Each preserved tree destroyed or suffering detrimental alteration during construction must be replaced by either a tree of comparable size and type, or by tree replacement conditions as provided by this section, before issuance of a C.O. 
b.  No C.O. or power release shall be issued for any development until all applicable approval or restoration plan conditions have been accomplished. 
c.  Failure to comply with any provisions of this section shall be referred to the code enforcement board, which has the power to levy a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day the violation occurs. 
d.  If an individual fails to obtain the appropriate authorization for any tree removal prior to development, the department may require a fine, which will vary depending on the number of offenses within the calendar year. 
1.  For a first offense, the fee is four (4) times the original tree removal fee. In the case of tree removal fee exemptions, the fee is four (4) times the standard processing fee. 
2.  For a second offense in one (1) calendar year, the fee is four (4) times the original tree removal fee plus one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). In the case of tree removal fee exemptions, the fee is four (4) times the standard processing fee plus five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
3.  For multiple offenses within one (1) calendar year, the fee is four (4) times the original tree removal fee plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. In the case of tree removal fee exemptions, the fee is four (4) times the standard processing fee plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(5)  If an individual falsifies information on any tree form, or does not post the tree permits on the subject property, the department may require a fine, which will vary depending on the number of offenses within a calendar year. 
a.  For a first offense, a written warning. 
b.  For a second offense in one (1) calendar year, the fine is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
c.  For multiple offenses within one (1) calendar year, the fine is one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each occurrence. 
(6)  For violations to any prohibited practice or planting a prohibited tree, the department may require a fine, which will vary depending on the number of offenses within a calendar year. 
a.  For a first offense, a written warning requiring the removal of the prohibited tree. 
b.  For a second offense in one (1) calendar year, the fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the violation will be forwarded to the code enforcement division to open a code case requiring the removal of the prohibited tree). 
c.  For multiple offenses within one (1) calendar year, the fine is two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each occurrence, and the violation will be forwarded to the code enforcement division to open a code case requiring the removal of the prohibited tree. 
Exhibit 8: List of Approved Tree Species 
Approved (For Tree Points) Canopy Tree Species—Native 
American Hophornbeam (Ostrya viginniana) 
American Elm (Ulmus americana) 
Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum) 
Cherry Laurel (Prunus caroliniana) 
Coconut Palm (Cocos nucifera) 
Florida Elm (Ulmus Americana var. floridana) 
Florida Royal Palm (Roystonea elata) 
Florida Scrub Hickory (Carya floridana) 
Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica) 
Gumbo-Limbo (Bursera simaruba) 
Jamaican Dogwood (Piscidia piscipula) 
Laurel Oak (Quercus laurifolia) 
Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) 
Loblobby Bay (Gordonia lasianthus) 
Loblolly Pine (Pinus taeda) 
Longleaf Pine (Pinus palustris) 
Mahogany (Swietenia mahagoni) 
Mastic (Sideroxylon foetidissimum) 
Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana) 
Pigeon Plum (Coccoloba diversifolia) 
Pignut Hickory (Carya glabra) 
Pond Cypress (Taxodium ascendens) 
Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana) 
Red Maple (Acer rubrum) 
Sabal or Cabbage Palm (Sabal palmetto) 
Sand Pine (Pinus clausa) 
Sassafras (Sassafras albidum) 
Shumard Oak (Quercus shumardii) 
South Florida Slash Pine (Pinus elliottii var. densa) 
Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora) 
Southern Red Maple (Acer rubrum) 
Southern Red Oak (Quercus falcata) 
Strangler Fig (Ficus aurea) 
Swamp Chestnut Oak (Quercus michauxii) 
Swamp Tupeolo or Black Gum (Nyssa sylvatica) 
Sweetbay Magnolia (Magnolia virginiana) 
Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua) 
Sugarberry or Hackberry (Celtis laevigata) 
Sycamore (Platanus occidentalis) 
Tulip Tree (Liriodenodron tulipfera) 
Turkey Oak (Quercus laevis) 
Water Oak (Quercus nigra) 
Water Hickory (Carya aquatica) 
Water Tupelo (Nyssa aquatica) 
Wild Tamarind (Lysiloma latisiliquum) 
Winged Elm (Ulmus alata) 
Approved (For Tree Points) Canopy Tree Species—Non-Native 
Black Olive (Bucida buceras) 
Golden Rain Tree (Koelreuteria formosana) 
Jacaranda (Jacaranda acutifolia) 
Royal Poinciana (Delonix regia) 
Other Canopy Trees Which May Be Used, But Not for Tree Points 
Queen Palm (Syagrus romanzoffiana) 
Washington or Petticoat Palm (Washingtonia robusta or Washingtonia filifera) 
Approved (For Tree Points) Understory Tree Species—Native 
American Holly (Ilex opaca) 
Baycedar (Suriana maritima) 
Black Ironwood (Krugiodenderon ferreum) 
Black Mangrove (Avicennia germinans) 
Blolly (Guapira discolor) 
Bustic Willow (Sideroxylon salicfolium) 
Button Bush (Cephalanthus occidentalis) 
Buttonwood (Conocarpus erectus) 
Catclaw Blackbeard (Pithecellobium unguis-cati) 
Chapman Oak (Quercus chapmanii) 
Chinquapin (Castanea pumila) 
Cherry Laurel (Prunus caroliniana) 
Coastal Plain Willow (Salix caroliniana) 
Cocoplum (Chrysobalanus icaco) 
Common Pawpaw (Asimina triloba) 
Dahoon Holly (Ilex cassine) 
East Palatka Holly (Ilex opaca "East Palatka") 
Florida Fiddlewood (Citharexylum fruticosum) 
Florida Thatch Palm (Thrinax radiate) 
Florida Willow (Salix floridana) 
Flowering Dogwood (Cornus florida) 
Fringetree (Chionanthus virginicus) 
Geiger Tree (Cordia sebestena) 
Heart Leaved Willow (Salix eriocephala) 
Hercules-Club or Toothache-Tree (Zanthoxylum clava-herculis) 
Hornbeam or Musclewood (Carpinus caroliniana) 
Lime Prickly-Ash (Zanthoxylum fagara) 
Myrtle Oak (Quercus myrtifolia) 
Pond Apple (Annona glabra) 
Pop Ash (Fraxinus caroliniana) 
Red Bay (Persea borbonia) 
Red Buckeye (Aesculus pavia) 
Redbud (Cercis canadensis) 
Red Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle) 
Red Mulberry (Morus rubra) 
Rusty Lyonia (Lyonia ferruginea) 
Sand Live Oak (Quercus geminata) 
Satinleaf (Chrysophyllun oliviforme) 
Scrub Oak (Quercus inopina) 
Sea Grape (Coccoloba uvifera) 
Southern Crabapple (Malus angustifolia) 
Southern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana) 
Spicewood (Calyptranthes pallens) 
Stoppers (Eugenia spp.) 
Summer Haw (Crataegus flava) 
Sweet Acacia (Acacia famesiana) 
Swamp Dogwood (Cornus foemina) 
Titi (Cyrilla recemiflora) 
Walter Viburnum (Viburnum obovatum) 
Wax Myrtle (Myrica cerifera) 
White Geiger (Cordia globosa) 
White Mangrove (Languncularia racemosa) 
Winged Sumac (Rhus copallinum) 
Witch Hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) 
Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria) 
Approved (for tree points) Understory Tree Species—Non-Native 
Shady Lady Black Olive (Bucida buceras 'Shady Lady') 
Bottlebrush (Callistemon spp.) 
Chinese Elm (Ulmus parvifolia) 
Crape Myrtle (Lagerstroemia indica) 
Jerusalem Thorn (Parkinsonia aculeata) 
Loquat (Eriobotrya japonica) 
Silver Dollar Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus cinerea) 
Silver Palm (Coccothrinax argentata) 
Tree of Gold (Tabebuia argentea) 
Trumpet Tree (Tabebuia spp.) 
Yellow Poinciana (Peltophorum pterocarpum) 
Other Understory Trees Which May Be Used, But Not for Tree Points 
Ligustrum (Ligustrum spp.)—Only species not found on the Florida Exotic Pest Plant Council's List of Invasive Species 
(Ord. No. 2015-018, § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2015-055, § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-15; Ord. No. 2018-020, § 1(Exh. A), 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2022-060, § 1(Exh. A), 11-22-22) 
Secs. 3-9-101—3-9-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3-9-150. - Transfer of density units (TDU). 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide a mechanism, consistent with protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public, by which the following may be accomplished: 
(1)  Residential development rights associated with property containing environmentally sensitive resources, historic or archeological resources, or which contains a bona fide agricultural use, or property otherwise deemed less suitable for development, may be properly transferred to property better suited for higher density residential development upon satisfaction of the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Future growth will be directed in a logical, economical, and efficient manner away from those areas of the county less suited for such growth, and toward those areas of the county best suited to provide the public services and facilities necessary for such growth. 
(3)  The county can provide a record of transfers of density units and impose appropriate restrictions on the properties involved in such transfers. 
The adoption of this section shall not affect the existing future land use map (FLUM) or zoning designation of any property. It shall provide a mechanism for increasing density on a property. This section does not allow an applicant to increase density beyond that allowed by the County Code and/or the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, all words, terms or phrases used in this article shall be ascribed the meaning which they have in common usage and which give this article the most reasonable application. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement to purchase density credits: An agreement between a purchaser and seller that binds the purchaser to buy and the seller to sell a specified number of density units from the seller contingent on the adoption by the board of county commissioners of the purchaser's plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation or street vacation. 
Agriculture: The business of cultivating the soil, producing crops and raising livestock, production of horticultural, aquacultural, and silvicultural products. 
Available utility: Available utility is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Barrier island: Barrier island is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Base Density: Base density is defined by the comprehensive plan. For calculation purposes, immediately adjacent parcels may be aggregated. 
Board: The Board of County Commissioners of Charlotte County, the elected governing body of unincorporated Charlotte County, Florida. 
Bona fide agricultural use: Use of a property for agriculture, which property has been classified as agricultural by the Charlotte county property appraiser pursuant to F.S. section 193.461. 
Certificate of transferable density credits (certificate): The certificate issued by the county which indicates the amount of density available to be used or sold by the certificate holder, as well as any specifications for use of the density. 
Certification of transferable density units (certification): The process whereby density is severed from property and a certificate is issued by the county signifying that the certificate holder has ownership of the indicated number of density units. 
Coastal high hazard area: The coastal high hazard area is defined by the and depicted on FLUM Series Map #14: Coastal High Hazard Areas and Evacuation Routes. 
Comprehensive plan: The document, and its amendments, adopted by the board, which meets the requirements of F.S. section 163.3177 and section 163.3178. 
County Code: The Code of Laws and Ordinances, Charlotte County, Florida, as the same may be amended. 
Covenant: A perpetual conservation easement or other perpetual restrictive covenant that encumbers the property that constitutes an SZ, granted by the owner(s) thereof to the county or to some other entity acceptable to the county. 
Density: Density is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Density credit: A density unit that has been severed from a property through the processes identified in this article and recognized by a certificate of transferable density credits. 
Density unit: Density unit is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Development: Development is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Development right: A right that entitles an owner of property to develop said property as may be recognized by the common law, statutory law, the United States or Florida Constitution, the County Code, the comprehensive plan or other applicable federal or state regulations. 
Encumbrances: Restrictions, liens, easements, equitable servitudes, special exceptions, existing development, land development regulations, or other matters which affect the SZ, only known or levied charges such as taxes, Municipal Services Benefit Unit (MSBU) charges, or Municipal Services Taxing Unit (MSTU) charges, shall be considered encumbrances. 
Environmentally sensitive resource: Environmentally sensitive resource is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
FLUCCS: The Florida Land Use Cover and Forms Classification System. 
Future land use map (FLUM) series: That series of maps identified as future land use maps adopted within the comprehensive plan, as may be amended. 
Historic or archeological resource: Historic or archeological resource is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Incentive density: Incentive density is described in FLU Policy 1.2.16: Incentive Density. 
Land Acquisition Trust Fund or LATF: The fund established by the board pursuant to subsection (k) below. 
Plan amendment: Plan amendment is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Preliminary plat: A preliminary map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being a complete exact representation of the subdivision and other information in compliance with the requirement of the County Code, and may include the terms "replat" or "revised plat", as defined in F.S. section 177.031(14), as amended. 
Receiving zone or RZ: The area of property into which density credits may be transferred. 
Rezoning: Rezoning is defined by the Comprehensive Plan. 
Rural service area: Rural service area is defined by the comprehensive plan and depicted on FLUM Series Map #3: 2030 Service Area Delineation. 
Sending zone or SZ: The area of property from which density credits may be severed and transferred. 
Substandard lot or parcel: Property which does not meet the minimum dimension or area requirements established by the County Code or the comprehensive plan. 
Transfer of density units or TDU: Transfer of density units is defined by the comprehensive plan. 
Title document: An ownership and encumbrance report (O&E) or other document of title issued by an attorney or a title insurance company acceptable to the county attorney. 
Unacceptable encumbrances: Encumbrances that, in the judgment of the county attorney, would impair or otherwise adversely affect the recorded covenant, whether in whole or in part, in the event of their enforcement or foreclosure. 
Urban service area: Urban service area is defined by the comprehensive plan and depicted on FLUM Series Map #3: 2030 Service Area Delineation. 
Zoning district: An area assigned a specific classification of uses and structures pursuant to the County Code. 
(c)  Applicability: 
(1)  This section shall apply within the unincorporated areas of Charlotte County. 
(2)  This section shall not apply within the City of Punta Gorda boundaries as it existed as of July 15, 2004. This section shall apply to areas annexed within the City of Punta Gorda or any new municipal area created after July 15, 2004, within Charlotte County. 
(3)  Any owner of property governed by subsections (c)(1) and (2) above may apply for a certification in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Any owner of property governed by subsections (c)(1) and (2) above who proposes a plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation or street vacation which acts to increase the base density on a parcel(s) of land shall apply for a TDU in accordance with the provisions of this section, except as provided in subsection (g)(4)c. 
(d)  Sending zones (SZ): 
(1)  Criteria. In order for property to qualify as an SZ, the proposed SZ must contain at least one (1) density unit and it must comply with one (1) of the following criteria: 
a.  It is located within a managed neighborhood, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #2: 2050 Framework. 
b.  It is located within the rural service area, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #3: Service Area Delineation, and contains a bona fide agricultural use or consists of substandard platted lots. 
c.  It has a resource conservation or preservation FLUM designation. 
d.  It is located within the coastal high hazard area (CHHA). 
e.  It contains historical or archaeological resources. 
f.  It contains environmentally sensitive resources. 
g.  It is located within the prime aquifer recharge area, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #6: Prime Aquifer Recharge Area. 
h.  It is located within the one-half mile setback of the Shell and Prairie Creek Watershed Overlay District or within Tippen Bay or Long Island Marsh, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #4: Watershed Overlay District. 
i.  It is located within a public water system wellhead protection area, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #7: Public Water System Wellhead Protection Areas. 
j.  It is designated as a wildlife corridor critical linkage, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #22: Critical Wildlife Corridors. 
k.  It is located within the urban service area and a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy has been issued to develop a school, place of worship, park, cemetery or mausoleum subsequent to December 3, 2007. 
l.  It is vacant and located within the urban service area, and the owner wishes to retain an allowed residential density below the base density. 
(2)  Determination of density for an SZ. 
a.  The density will be the base density. 
b.  Density units shall only be certified and transferred in whole units. A fractional unit shall not entitle the applicant to an additional density unit. 
c.  A certification of transferable density units may not be derived from density which has been already sold, transferred, or limited by easements, deed restrictions, equitable servitudes, restrictive covenants, special exceptions, existing development, land development regulations, or similar measures. 
(3)  Other provisions. 
a.  Density on those portions of a proposed SZ that contain an environmentally sensitive resource or which contain an historic or archeological resource must be totally removed. Density can be retained on other areas of the SZ if such retention is deemed consistent with the provisions of this section and the covenant. 
b.  An SZ may be used for mitigation or for relocation of protected plant or animal species, as such use or relocation may be allowed by federal and state regulations, provided the terms of the covenant are satisfied. 
c.  SZ sites within subsection (d)(1)a shall be placed under restrictive covenant and all density served except that owners shall retain one (1) unit of density per platted lot if public potable water or sanitary sewer service is available. 
d.  SZ sites within subsection (d)(1)b: 
i.  If consisting of substandard platted lots, such SZ sites shall be placed under a restrictive covenant and all density severed except that owners shall retain one (1) unit of density per platted lot if public potable water or sanitary sewer service is available. 
ii.  If not consisting of substandard platted lots, such SZ sites shall be placed under a conservation easement if environmentally sensitive land or agricultural easement if under active agricultural use and the intent is to continue that use. SZ sites under active agricultural use may retain one (1) unit per thirty (30) acres of active agricultural use, up to a maximum of five (5) units, for use by the property owner, family members of the property owner, or a land manager. 
e.  SZ sites within subsections (d)(1)c, g, or h shall be placed under a conservation easement and no density shall be retained, although an existing residential structure may be retained and such structure shall be counted as one (1) residential unit. 
f.  SZ sites within subsections (d)(1)d, e, f, or i: 
i.  If public potable water or sanitary sewer service is available, SZ sites shall be placed under a restrictive covenant and all density severed except that owners shall retain one (1) unit of density per platted lot or parcel. 
ii.  If public potable water or sanitary sewer service is not available, SZ sites shall be placed under a conservation easement and no density shall be retained, an existing residential structure may be retained and such structure shall be counted as one (1) residential unit. 
g.  SZ sites within subsection (d)(1)j shall be placed under a conservation easement if environmentally sensitive land or agricultural easement if under active agricultural use and the intent is to continue that use. SZ sites under active agricultural use may retain one (1) unit of density and active agricultural uses may continue but may not be intensified or expanded. If the property owner does not choose to manage the land for wildlife, the county or appropriate state or non-profit agency may be given rights to manage any non-agricultural and non-residential portions of the property for wildlife usage. 
(4)  Providing for county ownership. 
a.  An applicant may request that the county purchase or assume ownership, through donation, of a proposed SZ. The request must be expressed during the pre-application meeting. The request will be reviewed by the county. The review will consider the costs and benefits associated with the acquisition. 
b.  If the county agrees to assume ownership the applicant may not be required to supply a covenant or surveys. 
(e)  Receiving zones (RZ): 
(1)  Criteria: In order for property to qualify as an RZ, the proposed RZ must comply with one (1) of the following criteria and also not be located within a prohibited area, as described below: 
a.  It must be located within the urban service area and designated as one (1) of the following areas on FLUM Series Map #2: 2050 Framework: 
i.  Emerging neighborhood. 
ii.  Maturing neighborhood. 
iii.  Economic center. 
iv.  Economic corridor. 
v.  CRA. 
vi.  Revitalizing neighborhood. 
vii.  Rural Settlement Overlay District, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #8: Special Area Overlay Districts. 
b.  It must be located within the rural service area and designated as rural community mixed use on FLUM Series Map #1: 2030 Future Land Use. 
(2)  Prohibited receiving zones. Any property meeting any one (1) of the following criteria shall be prohibited from being an RZ: 
a.  Property within managed neighborhoods, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #2: 2050 Framework, as may be amended. 
b.  Property designated as resource conservation or preservation on FLUM Series Map #1: 2030 Future Land Use. 
c.  Properties containing historic or archeological resources or land deemed to contain environmentally sensitive resources; except that when a portion of a property contains these resources, that area deemed not to contain resources may receive density if it meets one (1) of the criteria of a receiving zone, a conservation easement will be required over the resource along with an undeveloped buffer of at least one hundred (100) feet or may have the required 100-foot buffer reduced only if approved through an environmental resource permit or applicable state or federal permit. Any development shall comply with federal and state regulations as well as policies set forth in the comprehensive plan to protect environmentally sensitive resources. An historical or archeological resource that is to be integrated into a development will not need to be buffered. 
d.  Property within the prime aquifer recharge area, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #6: Prime Aquifer Recharge Area. 
e.  Property within the one-half mile setback of the Shell and Prairie Creek Watershed Overlay District or within Tippen Bay or Long Island Marsh, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #4: Watershed Overlay District. 
f.  Property within a public water system wellhead protection area, as depicted on FLUM Series Map #7: Public Water System Wellhead Protection Areas unless public potable water and sanitary sewer services are available. 
g.  Property on any barrier island, except that density may be transferred within Manasota Key or Sandpiper Key according to the provisions of the Manasota Key Zoning District Overlay. 
(3)  Other provisions. 
a.  Property within the coastal high hazard area may be eligible to become an RZ. In order to make use of this exception, the applicant must transfer coastal high hazard area density credits to the property. Density credits from category 1 hurricane storm surge zone cannot be transferred into a tropical storm surge zone of an RZ nor can density credits from an AE flood zone be transferred into a VE flood zone of an RZ or be used for density in a building which touches a VE flood zone. Notwithstanding this exception, no transfers of density from a less to a more restrictive flood zone may take place west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor. Also notwithstanding this exception, in no case shall an increase of density be allowed on property located on a barrier island, except as provided by the Manasota and Sandpiper Key Zoning District Overlay. 
b.  Any property within the Charlotte Harbor Community Redevelopment Area (CHCRA), other than land zoned CR-3.5, shall qualify as an RZ. Such properties are permitted to receive density from any property located within the CHCRA or from any property located in any coastal high hazard area throughout the county with no limitations based on storm surge or flood zone transfers. Nothing in this article shall prevent the CHCRA from codifying a specific process for properties within the CHCRA. 
c.  Density certified under (d)(1) criteria k and l shall only be transferred onto properties located within qualified RZs with available public potable water and sanitary sewer services. Such density transfers shall also comply with all other special provisions. Such density transfers from a DRI shall only occur within that DRI. 
d.  Density on property west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor may only be increased by a transfer of density from a SZ located west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor. There shall be no transfer of density credits west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor from other areas of the county. This transfer of density credits between properties west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor shall comply with the provisions of this section. To ensure that density is not increased west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor, an applicant cannot purchase density from the county's LATF to be located west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor. 
e.  Density on property located within the rural service area may only be increased by a transfer of density from a SZ located within the rural service area. 
(f)  Covenant requirement. 
(1)  The covenant shall be prepared by the applicant and executed in accordance with the requirements of this section. Once the draft is approved, the covenant shall be signed by the applicant and held in escrow pending the approval of the certification. 
(2)  Each covenant shall be reviewed by the county attorney and shall contain such provisions that are reasonably required by the county attorney proscribing the use of the proposed SZ following the approval of the certification, including the following: 
a.  If the property contains environmentally sensitive resources or historic or archeological resources, the covenant shall limit or preclude uses of the proposed SZ such that the resources, whichever may be applicable, will be maintained in perpetuity following the completion of the certification. 
b.  If the property is submitted as a bona fide agricultural use, the covenant shall restrict the uses of the property to bona fide agricultural uses and the use of any retained density to family members of the property owner or employees, and their families, engaged in the agricultural operation. 
c.  Limit or preclude activities which are determined through the processes of this section to be detrimental to the appropriate maintenance of the proposed SZ. 
d.  Indicate the property or portions thereof that is restricted from future development and/or subject to limitations on future development. If the SZ consists of only a portion of the property, the covenant shall not contain provisions over the use of the remainder of the property unless such provisions are deemed necessary to ensure the viability of the SZ. The covenant may provide for spreading the remaining density onto the portion of the property used as an SZ. Environmentally sensitive resources or historic or archeological resources shall be protected. 
e.  Bind all owners of the proposed SZ and their respective heirs, successors and assigns. 
f.  Encumbrances as defined herein shall be satisfied prior to the county executing the restrictive covenant. 
(3)  The covenant shall be accompanied by a management plan if required herein. 
a.  A management plan shall be required if the applicant proposes to qualify the property as an SZ because it contains an environmentally sensitive resource, or historic or archeological resource, or a bona fide agricultural use, or a wildlife corridor critical linkage. The management plan shall describe how the proposed SZ will be maintained in perpetuity, how the resource shall be protected, and shall contain any other information reasonably requested or required by the county regarding the use, maintenance and the protection of the resources of the proposed SZ following the approval of the certification. If the property owner does not choose to manage the land for wildlife, the property owner must secure the county or appropriate state or non-profit agency to manage any non-agricultural and non-residential portions of the property for wildlife usage. 
b.  Substandard lots and property located within the coastal high hazard area shall not require a management plan. 
c.  The executed covenant shall be recorded with the Charlotte County Clerk of the Circuit Court by the applicant, and a recorded copy must be returned to the county. 
(g)  Procedure. 
(1)  Pre-application meeting. The property owner shall meet with the county prior to submitting an application to discuss the requirements of the TDU program and determine whether a proposed SZ is acceptable. 
(2)  Certification of sending zone. 
a.  Any owner of property may request a determination of the county on whether such property meets the criteria of an SZ at a pre-application meeting. If such determination is positive, the owner may apply to have their property approved as an SZ and density units certified. 
b.  No subsequent transfer to a different RZ shall take place without approval of a TDU pursuant to the requirements of this section. 
c.  Once a certification is approved and effective, density units shall not be restored to an SZ unless the area in which the SZ is located qualifies as an RZ. In such situations, the property may become an RZ if it meets all other requirements for an RZ under this section and the property has not been used for mitigation purposes for other developments. 
d.  Contents of application. An application for certification of transferable density units shall include the following items: 
i.  Notarized affidavits from all owners of the proposed SZ authorizing the application. The affidavit from the owners of the proposed SZ shall also provide consent to the modification of the FLUM and/or zoning district of the proposed SZ to conform with the revised and reduced density applicable to the proposed SZ upon the approval of the certification, at the county's discretion. Consent to a future plat vacation may also be necessary. 
ii.  A copy of the most current deed or title to the SZ property. 
iii.  Legal descriptions (with acreages) of the proposed SZ. 
iv.  Signed and sealed surveys of the proposed SZ that illustrate boundaries and all existing easements. The survey of the proposed SZ is not required if the proposed SZ consists of platted lots and the lots are included in their entirety. In such a case, a copy of the most recent plat with the proposed SZ outlined will suffice; the applicant must also indicate whether any easements or land encumbrances exist on the property. If a plat exists, the property owner(s) may be required to submit a plat vacation along with the certification application. The need for the plat vacation submittal will be determined at the pre-application meeting. If it is determined that it is not appropriate to pursue a plat vacation along with the certification, the applicant remains obligated to supply a boundary survey and utility easements if it becomes appropriate to pursue the vacation at a future time. 
v.  Maps illustrating the location of the proposed SZ. 
vi.  Title document dated no later than two (2) months prior to the application submittal date and which shows that the signatories who will execute the covenant constitute the owners of all interests in the proposed SZ. The document shall further indicate that there are no unacceptable encumbrances against the proposed SZ. If unacceptable encumbrances exist, they shall be fulfilled, removed, satisfied, released, subordinated or limited to the satisfaction of the county attorney such that the enforcement of the encumbrances will not impair or otherwise adversely affect the covenant, whether in whole or in part, or that the covenant will be prior in dignity to the encumbrances. 
vii.  A draft covenant pursuant to subsection (f), including a management plan, as required, in subsection (f)(3). 
viii.  A narrative indicating the base density of the SZ and describing how the calculation was derived, including an indication of how any encumbrances as identified per subsection (d)(2)c affect this base density and a statement of the number of density units requested to be transferred from the property and the number of density units requested to be retained. 
ix.  If the property is located in the coastal high hazard area, a boundary map of the property with the storm surge zones illustrated upon the map along with an indication of the acreage of each associated storm surge zone. If there are VE and AE flood zones, these shall also be illustrated on the map. Any encumbrances must be subtracted from the whole. The county may agree to delineate these areas; this must be agreed upon at the pre-application meeting. 
x.  Maps and surveys of the proposed SZ illustrating the existing land cover according to level 3 of the FLUCCS, locations of heritage trees, and listed flora and fauna species. This requirement may be eliminated by the county at the pre-application meeting under the following circumstances: property on which no density shall be retained; property that clearly does not contain any environmentally sensitive, historic or archeological resources; property which contains a bona fide agricultural use; property of which the county already has detailed knowledge as relates to environmentally sensitive, historic and archeological resources; and other circumstances that will be determined on a case by case basis. 
(3)  Transfer of sending density. 
a.  For any proposed RZ located in the coastal high hazard area, the applicant shall provide a map related to storm surge and flood zones detailing the amount of density which will be increased in each associated storm surge and flood zone. The county may agree to delineate these areas; this must be agreed upon at the pre-application meeting. 
b.  An application for a TDU that proposes to transfer density that has not yet been certified shall include the information required for a certification. Further, the application shall include information related to the RZ, such as property owner information and the application number for associated plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation or street vacation that established or is establishing the requirement for the TDU. 
c.  An application for a TDU that utilizes a certificate or the LATF option shall include information related to the RZ, such as property owner information and the application number for an associated plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation or street vacation that established or is establishing the requirement for the TDU. 
i.  If utilizing a certificate, the original certificate shall be submitted with the application for appropriate modification or extinguishment and held in escrow by the county attorney. 
ii.  If the LATF option is being utilized, a certificate shall be issued that reflects the density units actually paid for by the applicant to the county in accordance with the process described in subsection (k) and Resolutions 2004-248 and 2004-249. 
d.  Approval. An application for certification or TDU will be placed on consent agenda for approval by the board of county commissioners. 
(4)  Transfer of density. 
a.  A TDU application, if approved, will serve to transfer the number of density units that will be increased by a plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation or street vacation to that parcel of land upon which the increase occurs. The TDU process is the board's acknowledgement that the density has been shifted from an SZ to an RZ. 
b.  Plan amendment and/or rezoning not involving a planned development (PD) rezoning: 
i.  An applicant shall simultaneously submit one (1) of the following: 
a)  A TDU application utilizing certificates of transferable density credit. 
b)  A TDU application requesting the LATF option. 
c)  A certification application to sever density from an SZ and a TDU application requesting transfer of that density to the proposed RZ. 
d)  An agreement to purchase density credits and a TDU application requesting transfer of the credits to the proposed RZ. The transfer of ownership related to the density referred to in the agreement must occur within ten (10) working days of the approval of the plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation, or street vacation. 
ii.  The TDU application, and certification application as applicable, shall be held in abeyance until the approval of the plan amendment and/or rezoning and will be submitted to the board of county commissioners for approval at the next convenient board hearing after adoption of the plan amendment and/or rezoning. 
c.  For a plan amendment with a PD rezoning or a PD rezoning, an applicant may submit the TDU application subsequent to the adoption of the PD rezoning. The TDU must be approved by the board of county commissioners, and the density transferred to the RZ, prior to submittal by the applicant for preliminary plat approval, or, if platting will not be requested, prior to submittal for any permits to develop. A project which proposes to phase development in over time may submit individual TDU applications to transfer density equivalent to that necessary for development of that phase. 
d.  For a street vacation or plat vacation which acts to increase the property's base density, an applicant may, instead of submitting a TDU application, may choose to submit a restrictive covenant with the vacation that limits the density of the property to that existing at the time of application. If, in the future, the property owner seeks to increase the density on the previously vacated property, a public hearing shall be held to lift any restrictive covenant and concurrently transfer all required density onto the property. 
(5)  Notification. A plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation, or street vacation shall have notice of the transfer of density included in the advertisements and agenda notices for the plan amendment, rezoning, plat vacation, or street vacation. 
a.  Standards for approval. 
1.  The board may not grant a certification unless it finds that: 
i.  The certification meets the intent, purpose and provisions of this section, and the property meets the criteria of an SZ set within subsection (d). 
ii.  The applicant has signed and notarized the covenant. 
iii.  The applicant has submitted a plat vacation, if necessary. 
(6)  Incentive density program. The purpose of incentive density program is to implement FLU Policy 1.2.16: Incentive Density and FLU Policy 1.2.17: Incentive Density Usage, and to promote development and redevelopment within revitalizing neighborhoods, address the deficiency of market-rate rental properties, low-, very low- and moderate-income housing and workforce housing, and promote development within economic centers and community redevelopment areas. 
a.  At the time of an application for a plan amendment and/or rezoning to increase the base density of the property, the applicant must file an application for incentive density and the board at a public hearing may grant the incentive density at no cost. 
b.  The applicant must enter a developer's agreement with the county to comply with the requirements of incentive density, if applicable. 
c.  Properties located west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor shall only receive incentive density from managed neighborhoods west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor, and such incentive density must come from a similar or more restrictive FEMA flood zone. 
d.  If a revitalization plan is approved by the board, incentive density may be granted to the applicant according to the policies set forth in the revitalization plan. 
e.  For development of long-term market-rate rental housing, such projects must meet the following: 
i.  Shall be market-rate rentals in perpetuity. 
ii.  Shall be located outside of the coastal high hazard area. 
iii.  Shall be located within economic centers, economic districts, or revitalizing neighborhoods. 
iv.  Shall not be age-restricted. 
f.  For a development of low-, very low- and moderate-income housing, or workforce housing, such projects must meet the following: 
i.  Shall be income restricted for no less than twenty (20) or thirty (30) years, depending on funding sources, i.e. state or federal funding. 
ii.  Shall be located outside of the coastal high hazard area. 
iii.  Shall be located within economic centers, economic districts, or revitalizing neighborhoods. 
iv.  Shall not be age-restricted. 
g.  An adopted equivalency matrix or conversion table may be used to increase residential dwelling units above the maximum approved by the comprehensive plan or DRI development orders, provided such property shall be located outside of the coastal high hazard area and shall not be located west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor. 
(h)  Effective date of the certification or TDU. 
(1)  A certification shall become effective only when the covenant and the management plan, as applicable, have been recorded by the applicant with the Charlotte County Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
a.  Upon the date of the recording of a certification approved pursuant to this section, the county shall issue a certificate to the property owner(s) of the SZ. The issuance of the certificate shall establish the quantity of density units for the property at the time the certificate is issued and shall be considered a final determination. Once a certificate has been issued for the SZ, the property owner shall maintain the property in accordance with the requirements of the covenant. 
i.  Density credits approved pursuant to this article may be transferred to an eligible RZ. 
ii.  Density credits transferred to an eligible RZ pursuant to this article, which are not used for the intended RZ development, may be recertified. The RZ owner shall simultaneously apply to revise the zoning district and/or FLUM, whichever is applicable, of the original RZ from which these credits were transferred to reflect the decrease in density. 
iii.  Upon the sale of density credits to another owner, the seller of the density credits shall surrender the certificate to the county for appropriate modification or extinguishment. 
iv.  In the event an SZ property owner has not found a willing RZ to which it can transfer its density credits, density credits from the SZ may be transferred to the county. 
b.  A TDU shall not become effective and no permits to develop shall be issued for the RZ, until: 
i.  The TDU has been approved by the county. 
ii.  The LATF fee required by subsection (k), if applicable, has been paid to the county. 
iii.  The certification of the SZ has been approved and all documents necessary have been recorded with the Charlotte County Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
iv.  The certificate, if applicable, has been surrendered to the county for appropriate modification or extinguishment. 
(i)  Limited relief. 
(1)  If the application does not meet the substantive requirements of this article, the applicant may request to the board limited relief from those requirements. The relief would be from the strict application of the requirements which have either prohibited the certification or TDU for the owner of the affected real property. Additionally, the applicant must establish the following prerequisites to the satisfaction of the board, if applicable. The applicant cannot seek limited relief from any provisions of density transferring within the area west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor. 
(2)  The request shall be in writing and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The section(s) from which relief is sought. 
b.  The nature of the relief. 
c.  The reasons why the limited relief should be granted. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the written appeal, it will be placed on the nearest available agenda date of the board. 
(4)  The board may provide limited relief to the substantive requirements of this article based on the following findings, if applicable: 
a.  The proposed TDU furthers the intent and purpose of this section. 
b.  The proposed TDU furthers the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
c.  The proposed TDU directs further growth in a logical, efficient, and economical manner away from those areas of the county less suited to such growth, and toward those areas of the county better suited to provide the public services and facilities necessary for such growth. 
d.  The proposed TDU will further the protection of environmentally sensitive historic and archeological resources, or bona fide agricultural uses. 
e.  The proposed TDU will shift density from one (1) area to another area, where such shift is found to be in the best interest of the county. 
f.  The proposed TDU will further the health, safety and welfare of general public. 
g.  The proposed TDU located with the CHHA. A study must be submitted by the applicant to demonstrate no negative impact on evacuation times. 
(j)  Waiver. There shall be no waiver from the requirement of complying with this section except through the adoption of a comprehensive plan text amendment and accompanying map amendment. 
(k)  Land Acquisition Trust Fund (LATF). 
(1)  If an applicant does not choose to include a proposed SZ or an approved certificate with a proposed TDU, the applicant shall pay a contribution fee to be deposited in the county's Land Acquisition Trust Fund. 
(2)  Once an applicant submits a TDU application indicating their desire to use the LATF option, the county will provide the current unit price equivalent for a unit of density within seven (7) days. The unit price will be current to market conditions, directly related to the county's current acquisition costs of acquiring lands under the LATF, and reflective of land values within the general area of the proposed RZ. 
(3)  The unit price shall be formally established by the resolution at the time of approval of the TDU application. In the event that the applicant chooses to not contribute to the LATF at the time of adoption of the TDU, or chooses to submit the development in phases, a process for payment shall be established in the resolution with the understanding that the amount of the fee required upon payment shall be the unit price equivalent for a density unit at the time of payment, which may not be the same price as would have been paid by the applicant at the time of approval of the TDU by the board. 
(4)  The payment of the contribution fee is required prior to preliminary plat approval, or, in the event a preliminary plat will not be requested by the applicant, prior to request for any permits to develop. The applicant shall not be issued any permits for development on the RZ, or the applicable phase of the RZ, until such time as the payment of the fee has been received by the county. 
(5)  The amount of the fee shall be equal to the number of density units approved for the RZ multiplied by the unit price for a density unit, included as part of the resolution adopting the TDU. 
(6)  An applicant who is proposing to transfer density onto property located in a tropical storm surge or category 1 hurricane storm surge zone, or who is proposing to increase density on property west of the Myakka River and Charlotte Harbor, cannot utilize the LATF option. 
(Ord. No. 2018-013, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-2018; Ord. No. 2018-014, § 1(Exh. A), 3-27-1018) 